EXPANDED SCREENPLAY: “STAR WARS: EPISODE VI: RETURN OF THE JEDI” 

v. 1.2

by George Lucas and Lawrence Kasdan

Featuring extra material from 

James Kahn

Brian Daley

Script Expansion by Christopher McElroy (mcelroycg@cableone.net)
The following is based on a screenplay available in the public domain, incorporating material published by Del Rey Books, Marvel Comics Inc., Dark Horse Comics, Scholastic Books, and Highbridge Audio. No copyright infringement is intended. The following is for entertainment purposes only. 


20'TH CENTURY FOX LOGO AND THEME

LUCASFILM LTD. LOGO



EXT. SPACE (FX) 

TITLE CARD: A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away...

A vast sea of stars serves as the backdrop for the main title.  War drums echo through the heavens as a rollup slowly crawls into infinity…

 

                                            Episode VI
                                  RETURN OF THE JEDI

                                             Luke Skywalker has returned to
                                  his home planet of Tatooine in 
                                  an attempt to rescue his
                                  friend Han Solo from the 
                                  clutches of the vile gangster
                                  Jabba the Hutt.

                                  Little does Luke know that the
                                  GALACTIC EMPIRE has secretly
                                  begun construction on a new                                  
                                  armored space station even
                                  more powerful than the first
                                  dreaded Death Star.

                                  When completed, this ultimate
                                  weapon will spell certain doom
                                  for the small band of Rebels
                                  struggling to restore freedom
                                  to the galaxy…


PAN DOWN to reveal a monstrous half-completed Death Star, its massive superstructure curling away from the completed section like the arms of a giant octopus. Beyond, in benevolent contrast, floats the small, green moon of ENDOR.

An Imperial Star Destroyer moves overhead toward the massive armored space station, followed by two zipping TIE fighters. A small Imperial shuttle rockets from the main bay of the ship and hustles toward the Death Star.

INT. IMPERIAL SHUTTLE - COCKPIT

The shuttle captain makes contact with the Death Star.

SHUTTLE CAPTAIN: Command station, this is ST 321. Code Clearance Blue. We're starting our approach.
Deactivate the security shield.

INT. DEATH STAR CONTROL ROOM

DEATH STAR CONTROLLER: The security deflector shield will be deactivated when we have confirmation of your code transmission. Stand by... 

INT. IMPERIAL SHUTTLE – COCKPIT

The captain smiles nervously at his co-pilot. 

SHUTTLE CAPTAIN: Quick as you can, please. This had better not take long – he’s in no mood to wait…

INT. DEATH STAR CONTROL ROOM 

On the controller’s viewscreen, a schematic of the shuttle and a line of technical jargon appear. 

DEATH STAR CONTROLLER: You are clear to proceed.

INT. IMPERIAL SHUTTLE - COCKPIT

SHUTTLE CAPTAIN: We're starting our approach.

INT. DEATH STAR - CONTROL ROOM

Operators move about among the control panels. A SHIELD OPERATOR hits switches beside a large screen, on which is a display of the Death Star, the moon Endor, and a bright web delineating the invisible deflector shield.

OPERATOR: Sir! 

A control officer rushes over to the shield operator.

OFFICER: What is it? 
OPERATOR: That shuttle has a class-one priority ranking. 
OFFICER: (a scared whisper) Vader…

The control officer moves to a view port and watches as the Imperial shuttle lands in the massive docking bay. A squad of Imperial stormtroopers moves into formation before the craft.

OFFICER: Inform the commander that Lord Vader's shuttle has arrived.
OPERATOR: Yes, sir.

INT DEATH STAR - MAIN DOCKING BAY

The DEATH STAR COMMANDER, MOFF JERJERROD, a tall, confident technocrat, strides through the assembled troops to the base of the shuttle ramp. The troops snap to attention; many are uneasy about the new arrival. Even the arrogant Death Star commander swallows nervously. 

The exit hatch of the shuttle opens with a WHOOSH, revealing only darkness. Then, heavy FOOTSTEPS AND MECHANICAL BREATHING. From this black void appears DARTH VADER, LORD OF THE SITH. Vader looks over the assemblage as he walks down the ramp.

JERJERROD: Lord Vader, this is an unexpected pleasure. We're honored by your presence.
VADER: You may dispense with the pleasantries, Commander. I'm here to put you back on schedule.

The commander turns ashen and begins to shake.

JERJERROD: I assure you, Lord Vader, my men are working as fast as they can.
VADER: Perhaps I can find new ways to motivate them.
JERJERROD: That won’t be necessary, My Lord. I tell you, this station will be operational as planned.
VADER: The Emperor does not share your optimistic appraisal of the situation.
JERJERROD: But he asks the impossible! I need more men!
VADER: Then perhaps you can tell him when he arrives.
JERJERROD: (aghast) The Emperor's coming here?
VADER: That is correct, Commander. And he is most displeased with your apparent lack of progress.
JERJERROD: We shall double our efforts!!
VADER: I hope so, Commander, for your sake. The Emperor is not as forgiving as I am.

Vader stalks across the docking bay, leaving a terrified Jerjerrod behind him. 

WIPE TO: 

EXT. ROAD TO JABBA'S PALACE - TATOOINE

A lonely, windswept road meanders through the desolate Tatooine terrain. We HEAR a familiar BEEPING and a distinctive reply before catching sight of ARTOO-DETOO and SEE-THREEPIO, making their way along the road toward the ominous palace of Jabba the Hutt. 

THREEPIO: That is scarcely what I would call a palace. It looks more like an iron foundry. 

Artoo beeps. 

THREEPIO: Of course I'm worried. And you should be, too. Lando Calrissian and poor Chewbacca never returned from this awful place. Can you imagine what they’ve done to them?!? 

Artoo whistles timidly.

THREEPIO: Don't be so sure. If I told you half the things I've heard about this Jabba the Hutt, you'd probably short-circuit. Come along, let’s get this over with…

The two droids fearfully approach the massive gate to the palace.

EXT. JABBA’S PALACE – GATE

The two droids stand before a massive iron door, part of a series of stone and iron walls forming several gigantic cylindrical towers that rises out of a mountain of sand. Artoo beeps. 

THREEPIO: Artoo, are you sure this is the right place?

Artoo whistles. Threepio looks around for some kind of signaling device. 
               
THREEPIO: I don’t see a comlink terminal…I’d better knock, I suppose.

He timidly knocks on the iron door.

THREEPIO: (instantly) There doesn't seem to be anyone there. Let's go back and tell Master Luke.

A small hatch in the middle of the door opens and a spidery mechanical arm, with a large electronic eyeball on the end, pops out and inspects the two droids.

STRANGE VOICE: Tee chee tad un gootah!
THREEPIO: Goodness gracious me!
STRANGE VOICE: By choo ahd bin kee? 

Threepio points to Artoo, then to himself.

THREEPIO: Artoo Detoowha…bo Seethreepiowha… ey toota odd mischka Jabba du Hutt.

The eye looks from one robot to the other. It pokes forward toward Threepio. 

STRANGE VOICE: Kuju gwankee? Mypee gaza, oh hohoho! 

Laughing, the eye zips back into the door. The hatch slams shut. Artoo beeps his concern.

THREEPIO: I don't think they're going to let us in, Artoo. We'd better go.

Artoo beeps his reluctance as Threepio turns to leave. Suddenly the massive door starts to rise with a horrific metallic SCREECH. The robots turn back and face an endless black cavity. The droids look at one another, afraid to enter.

STRANGE VOICE: NUDD CHAA!!

Artoo starts forward into the gloom. 

THREEPIO: Artoo, wait. Oh, dear! Artoo. Artoo, I really don't think we should rush into all this.

Threepio rushes after his stubby companion. The droid jumps at the sight of a metal spider-creature, carrying a brain inside a jar. Artoo continues down the corridor, with Threepio following.

THREEPIO: OH!! Oh, Artoo!  Artoo, wait for me!

INT. JABBA'S PALACE - HALLWAY

The droids walk tentatively into the long, dark hallway. 

The frightened robots are met by two giant, green GAMORREAN GUARDS. One guard grunts an order. Artoo beeps nervously.

THREEPIO: You don’t want to know what he said. Just you deliver Master Luke's message and get us out of here. Oh my! 

The door slams shut with a loud crash that echoes through the dark passageway. 

THREEPIO: Oh no...

Walking toward them out of the darkness is BIB FORTUNA, a Twi’lek – a humanlike alien with long tentacles protruding from his skull.

BIB: Tay chuda, musuq!
THREEPIO: Yes, I realize that we have arrived uninvited, sir…
BIB: Die Wanna Wanga!
THREEPIO: Oh, my! Die Wanna Waugow. We -- we bring a message to your master, Jabba the Hutt.
BIB: Tay Jabba wanga? 

Artoo lets out a series of quick beeps.

THREEPIO: (con’t) ... and a gift. (thinks a moment, then to Artoo) Gift, what gift?

Bib shakes his head negatively.

BIB: Nee Jabba no badda. Ees eye oh toe? 

Bib holds out his hand toward Artoo and the tiny droid backs up a bit, letting out a protesting array of squeaks. 

BIB: Zee chada oh mootee. Me chaade su goodie.

Artoo beeps and whistles furiously at Bib. Threepio turns to the strange-looking alien.

THREEPIO: He says that our instructions are to give it only to Jabba himself. In person. 

Bib thinks about this for a moment.

THREEPIO: I'm terribly sorry. I'm afraid he's ever so stubborn about these sort of things.

Bib gestures for the droids to follow.

BIB: Nudd Chaa! Nudd Chaa, Totonno!

The droids follow the tall, tentacled alien into the darkness, trailed by the two guards.

THREEPIO: Artoo, I have a bad feeling about this.

INT. JABBA'S THRONE ROOM

The throne room is filled with the vilest, most grotesque CREATURES ever conceived in the universe. Artoo and Threepio seem very small as they pause in the doorway to the dimly lit chamber. 

THREEPIO: What an appalling scene. 

Artoo blurts an inquiry. 

THREEPIO: One would think the rest of the galaxy safe, what with every thug, debaucher, and scofflaw having gathered here. 

Light shafts partially illuminate the drunken courtiers as Bib Fortuna crosses the room to the platform upon which rests the leader of this nauseating crowd: JABBA THE HUTT. The monarch of the galactic underworld is a repulsive blob of bloated fat with a maniacal grin. Chained to the horrible creature is the beautiful alien female dancer named OOLA. At the foot of the dais sits an obnoxious monkeylike creature, SALACIOUS CRUMB. Bib whispers something in the slobbering degenerate's ear. Jabba laughs horribly, at the two terrified droids before him. Threepio bows politely.

BIB: Jabba, kada no pase mylota. 
THREEPIO: Good morning.
JABBA: Bo Shuda!

The robots jump forward to stand before the repulsive, loose-skinned villain. Jabba snorts, and smacks his lipless mouth. 

THREEPIO: The message, Artoo, the message.

Artoo whistles, and a beam of light projects from his domed head, creating a HOLOGRAM of LUKE SKYWALKER on the floor. The image grows to over ten feet tall, and the young Jedi towers over the space gangsters. Luke is clad in a black martial arts outfit, and carries himself with the poise and confidence of maturity. 

LUKE: Greetings, Exalted One. Allow me to introduce myself. I am Luke Skywalker, Jedi Knight and friend to Captain Solo. 
JABBA: Oooo-oo. 
LUKE: I know that you are powerful, mighty Jabba, and that your anger with Solo must be equally powerful. I seek an audience with Your Greatness to bargain for Solo's life. 

Jabba and the crowd laughs loudly at this. 

LUKE: With your wisdom, I'm sure that we can work out an arrangement which will be mutually beneficial and enable us to avoid any unpleasant confrontation. As a token of my goodwill, I present to you a gift: these two droids.

Threepio is startled by this announcement.

THREEPIO: What did he say?
LUKE: (cont)... Both are hardworking and will serve you well.
THREEPIO: This can't be! Artoo, you're playing the wrong message!
LUKE: I await your decision. 

Luke's hologram disappears. Jabba laughs while Bib speaks to him in Huttese.

BIB: (in Huttese subtitled) Mahstah, fargan etwor not? Yees no Jedi!  <Bargain rather than fight? He is no Jedi!> 
JABBA: (in Huttese subtitled) Ono wangee gogh pal ool. <There will be no bargain.>
THREEPIO: We're doomed.
JABBA: Peecha wangee cogh pah. Tong nam nee took chan kee troi. <I will not give up my favorite decoration. I like Captain Solo where he is.>

Jabba laughs hideously and looks toward an alcove beside the throne. Hanging high, flat against the wall, exactly as we saw him last, is a carbonized HAN SOLO.

THREEPIO: Artoo, look! Captain Solo. And he's still frozen in carbonite!!

INT. DUNGEON CORRIDOR

One of Jabba's Gamorrean guards marches Artoo and Threepio down a dank, shadowy passageway lined with holding cells. The cries of unspeakable creatures bounce off the cold stone walls. Occasionally a repulsive arm or tentacle grabs through the bars at the hapless droids. Artoo beeps pitifully.

THREEPIO: What could possibly have come over Master Luke. Is it something I did? He never expressed any unhappiness with my work. Oh! Oh! How horrid!!

A large tentacle wraps around Threepio's neck. He manages to break free.

THREEPIO: Our hour has come. We will never leave this dank netherworld in one piece. 

They move on to a door at the end of the corridor.

INT. BOILER ROOM

The door slides open, revealing a room filled with steam and noisy machinery. The guard motions them into the boiler room, where they are met by a tall, thin humanlike robot named EV-9D9  (EVE-NINEDENINE). Behind the robot can be seen a torture rack pulling the legs off a screaming baby work droid. A second power droid is upside down.  As smoking branding irons are pressed into his feet, the stubby robot lets out an agonized electronic scream. 

THREEPIO: May the maker preserve us! 

Artoo and Threepio cringe as the guard grunts to EV-9D9.

NINEDENINE: Ah, good. New acquisitions. You are a protocol droid, are you not?
THREEPIO: I am See-Threepio, human-cy --
NINEDENINE: (interrupts) Yes or no will do.
THREEPIO: Oh. Well, yes.
NINEDENINE: How many languages do you speak?
THREEPIO: I am fluent in over six million forms of communication, and can readily...
NINEDENINE: Splendid! We have been without an interpreter since our master got angry with our last protocol droid and disintegrated him.
THREEPIO: Disintegrated?!?
NINEDENINE: (to a Gamorrean guard) Guard! This protocol droid might be useful -- temporarily. Fit him with a restraining bolt and take him back to His Excellency's main audience chamber.

The guard shoves Threepio toward the door.

THREEPIO: (disappearing) Artoo, don't leave me! Ohhh!

Artoo lets out a plaintive cry as the door closes. Then he beeps angrily.

NINEDENINE: You're a feisty little one, but you'll soon learn some respect. I have need for you on the master's Sail Barge. Several of our astrodroids have been disappearing recently – stolen for spare parts, most likely. And I think you'll fit in nicely. Or else. 

The poor work droid in the background lets out another tortured electronic scream, then breaks apart in a shower of sparks. 

INT. JABBA'S THRONE ROOM

The court of Jabba the Hutt is in the midst of a drunken, raucous party. Sloppy, smelly monsters cheer and make rude noises as Oola and a large six-breasted female dancer perform in front of Jabba's throne. Jabba’s alien band plays a wildly rhythmic tune on reeds, drums and other exotic instruments. The Hutt rocks and swings in time with the music and toys with Oola’s leash. The song comes to a close, and everyone applauds. 

JABBA: Cha Cha go nee cha! Goo nee tah! <Ah! Do that again!> 

The band begins again. 

JOH YOWZA: Goo nee tay! 

The band starts to play the wrong song. 

JOH YOWZA: No no no, aw laowah. GOO NEE TAY!!! 

The music swells. Oola and the other dancer perform as the alien band rocks. Jabba leers at the dancers and with a lustful gleam in his eye beckons Oola to come and sit with him. 

JABBA: Tua Utta Jabba. 

She stops dancing and backs away, shaking her head. Jabba gets angry and points to a spot next to him. Oola continues to protest and pull against the taut leash. 

JABBA: Da Eitha!

The lovely alien shakes her head again and screams.

OOLA: Na Chuba negatorie Na! Na! Natoota...

Jabba is furious and pulls her toward him, tugging on the chain.

JABBA: BOSCKA!!!

Jabba slams his fist down on a button, and before the dancer can flee, a trap door in the floor springs open and swallows her up. As the door snaps shut, several revelers hurry over to watch her fate through the grate.

INT. RANCOR PIT

Oola tumbles down a chute and sprawls on the floor of a vast, dark pit. On one end of the pit is an giant iron gate that slowly rises. Oola’s eyes go wide as she sees what is beyond the door. 

INT. JABBA’S THRONE ROOM

Below the trap door, a muffled growl is followed by a hideous scream. Jabba and his monstrous friends laugh hysterically. 

Threepio cringes and glances wistfully at the carbonite form of Han Solo, but is immediately distracted by a gunshot offscreen. An unnatural quiet sweeps the boisterous gathering. On the far side of the room, the crush of debauchers moves aside to allow the approach of two guards followed by BOUSHH, an oddly cloaked bounty hunter, leading his captive, Han Solo's copilot, CHEWBACCA THE WOOKIEE.

Bib takes his place next to his disgusting master, and whispers into his ear, pointing at Chewbacca and the bounty hunter. Jabba listens intently, then the bounty hunter bows before the gangster and speaks a greeting in a strange, electronically processed tongue (Ubese).

BOUSHH: (in Ubese subtitled) Eyah-tay, eyah-tay. Boushh, yo-toe. <I have come for the bounty on this Wookiee.>
THREEPIO: Oh, no! Chewbacca!
JABBA: (in Huttese subtitled) Cheesa eejah wahkee Chewbahkah. <At last we have the mighty Chewbacca.>

Jabba lets out a loud, long, blood-curdling laugh and turns to Threepio, waving him closer. The reluctant droid obeys.

THREEPIO: Oh, uh, yes, uh, I am here, Your Worshipfulness. Uh... yes!

Jabba continues speaking, as Threepio nervously translates. Boushh listens, studying the dangerous creatures around the room. He notices BOBA FETT standing near the door.

JABBA: Yu-bahk ko rahto kama wahl bahk? Eye yees ka cho. Kawa Woo-kee. 
THREEPIO: Oh. The illustrious Jabba bids you welcome and will gladly pay you the reward of twenty-five thousand.
BOUSHH: Yo-toe, yo-toe. <I want fifty thousand. No less.>
THREEPIO: Fifty thousand. No less. 

Jabba immediately flies into a rage, knocking the golden droid off the raised throne into a clattering heap on the floor. Boushh adjusts his weapon as Jabba raves in Huttese and Threepio struggles back onto the throne. The disheveled droid tries to compose himself.

THREEPIO: Uh, oh... but what, what did I say?  
JABBA: Moonon keejo? EYE?!?
THREEPIO: (to Boushh) Uh, the mighty Jabba asks why he must pay fifty thousand.

The bounty hunter holds up a small silver ball in his hand. It starts beeping and clicking. 

BOUSSH: Aye. Yo-toe. 

Threepio looks at it, then looks at Jabba, then back to the bounty hunter. The droid is very nervous and Jabba is getting very impatient, and roars at Threepio in Huttese. 

THREEPIO: Boushh demands it…because he's holding a thermal detonator!!!

The guards instantly back away, as do most of the other monsters in the room. Fett instantly raises his rifle. Jabba stares at the silver ball, which begins to glow in the bounty hunter's hand. The room has fallen into a tense hush. Jabba stares at the bounty hunter malevolently until a sly grin creeps across his vast mouth and he begins to laugh.

JABBA: Kaso ya yee koli tra do kahn nee go. Yu bahn chuna leepa. <This bounty hunter is my kind of scum. Fearless and inventive.>

Jabba continues.

JABBA: Kuo meeta tah te fye. Dah tee teema nye. 
THREEPIO: (translates) Jabba offers the sum of thirty-five. And I suggest you take it.

Bib and the other monsters study the bounty hunter and wait for his reaction. 

BOUSHH: Ya-toe. Cha. 

Boushh releases a switch on the thermal detonator and it goes dead.

THREEPIO: He agrees!

The raucous crowd of monsters erupts in a symphony of cheers and applause as the party returns to its full noisy pitch. Chewbacca growls and is led away. The band starts up and dancing girls take the center of the floor, to the hoots of the loudly appreciative creatures.

Boushh leans against a column with gunfighter cool and surveys the scene, his gaze stopping only when it connects with a glare from across the room: Boba Fett is watching him. Boushh shifts slightly, cradling his weapon lovingly. Boba Fett shifts with equally ominous arrogance.

INT. DUNGEON CORRIDOR AND CELL

Gamorrean guards lead Chewie down the same hallway we saw before. As he is led away we spot LANDO CALRISSIAN, disguised as a skiff guard in a partial facemask.  When a tentacle reaches out at the Wookiee, Chewie's ferocious ROAR echoes against the walls and the tentacle snaps back into its cell in terror. It takes all the guards to hurl Chewie roughly into a cell, slamming the door behind him. Chewie lets
out a pathetic howl and bangs on the iron door.

EXT. JABBA'S PALACE

The palace is sitting in the light of the double sunset. On the road in front, a large toadlike creature flicks its tongue out for a desert rodent and burps in satisfaction.

INT JABBA'S THRONE ROOM - NIGHT

Silence. The room is deserted, only the awful debris of the alien celebration giving mute witness to the activity here before. Several drunk creatures lie unconscious around the room, snoring loudly.

A shadowy figure moves stealthily among the columns at the perimeter of the room and is revealed to be Boushh, the bounty hunter. He picks his way carefully through the snoring, drunken monsters.

Han Solo, the frozen space pirate, hangs spotlighted on the wall, his coffin-like case suspended by a force field. The bounty hunter deactivates the force field by flipping a control switch to one side of the coffin. The heavy case slowly lowers to the floor of the alcove.

Boushh steps up to the case, studying Han, then turns to the controls on the side of the coffin. He activates a series of switches and, after one last, hesitant look at Han, slides the decarbonization lever. The case begins to emit a sound as the hard shell covering the contours of Han's face begins to melt away. The bounty hunter watches as Han's body is freed of its metallic coat and his forearms and hands, previously raised in reflexive protest, drop slackly to his side. His face muscles relax from their mask of horror, and he slides out of the coffin and crashes to the ground facedown. He appears quite dead.

Boushh's ugly helmet leans close to Han's face listening for the breath of life. Nothing. He waits. Han's eyes pop open with a start and he begins coughing violently. The bounty hunter steadies the staggering newborn.

HAN: (weak as a kitten) lemme out…get me out of this thing…
BOUSHH: Don’t try to stand up yet. Just relax for a moment. You're free of the carbonite.

Han touches his face with his hand and moans.

HAN: something’s wrong…
BOUSHH: Shhh. You have hibernation sickness.
HAN: I can't see.
BOUSHH: Your eyesight will return in time. 
HAN: Where am I?
BOUSHH: Jabba's palace. Come. We must hurry if we’re to leave this place. 

Boushh starts to lift Han up, but the pirate slaps the bounty hunter’s hands away. Han’s hand brushes the bounty hunter’s mask, and he jerks back. 

HAN: Who are you?

The bounty hunter reaches up and lifts the helmet from his head, revealing the beautiful face of PRINCESS LEIA.

LEIA: Someone who loves you.
HAN: Leia!

Leia silences Han with a quick but passionate kiss, and she starts to haul him up. 

LEIA: Save your strength. I’ve gotta get you out of here.
HAN: Everything’s a blur…I’m not gonna be much help…

Leia impulsively kisses him again. 

LEIA: We’ll make it. 

As Leia helps her weakened lover to stand up, the relative quiet is pierced by an obscene HUTTESE CACKLE from the other side of the alcove.

HAN: What's that? I know that laugh...

The curtain on the far side of the alcove opens, revealing Jabba the Hutt, surrounded by Bib and other aliens. He laughs again, and his gross cronies join in a cacophony of alien glee.

JABBA: Oo tay ah go day wah. Ko jay mada. <Your taste in companions has improved. Your luck has not.>
HAN: Hey, Jabba. Look, Jabba, I was just on my way to pay you back, but I got a little sidetracked. It's not my fault.

Jabba laughs.

JABBA: Ah chee ka gogh yu nee, Solo. Uu na keeng saleen na back bahdlah beeska chatah, wee now kong bantha poodoo. <It's too late for that, Solo. You may have been a good smuggler, but now you're Bantha fodder.>
HAN: Look...
JABBA: Ya tha meen chool. <Take him away.>

The guards grab Han and start to lead him away.

HAN: Jabba... I'll pay you triple! You're throwing away a fortune here. Don't be a fool!

Han is dragged off, as Lando quickly moves forward and attempts to lead Leia away.

JABBA: Rah toe co slayats my. <Bring her to me.>

Jabba chuckles as Lando and a second guard drag the beautiful young princess toward him. Threepio peeks from behind a monster and quickly turns away in disgust.

LEIA: We have powerful friends. You're gonna regret this...
JABBA: Oolo tah. Ah nah mah toe tah. Eyah… <I'm sure. But in the meantime…>

Inexorably her lovely face moves to within a few inches of Jabba's ugly blob of a head, and Leia turns away in disgust as Jabba’s slimy tongue licks her cheek.

LEIA: Ugh!
THREEPIO: Ohhh, I can't bear to watch…

INT. DUNGEON CELL

The heavy metal door of the dungeon whines and slowly creaks open. A guard throws the blinded star captain into the dark cell and the door slams shut behind him, leaving only a thin sliver of light from a crack in the door. Han is trying to collect himself when suddenly a growl is heard from the far side of the cell. He jumps back against the cell door and listens.

HAN: Chewie? Chewie, is that you?

The shadowy figure lets out a crazy yell and races toward Han, lifting him off the ground with a big hug that carries them into the light, revealing Chewie.

HAN: Ah! Chew--Chewie!

The giant Wookiee barks with glee.

HAN: Wait. I can't see, pal. What's goin' on?

Chewie barks an excited blue streak. 

HAN: Luke? Luke's crazy. He can't even take care of himself, much less rescue anybody. Why’d you listen to him? 

Chewie barks a reply.

HAN: A...Jedi Knight? Oh, come on. Leia tried to be a one-princess rescue team and now Jabba’s got her. I--I'm out of it for a little while, everybody gets delusions of grandeur.

Chewie growls insistently. 

HAN: Lando’s here too? Chewie, I need you – don’t start hallucinating on me. 

Chewie woofs offendedly. 

HAN: All right, all right, don’t get your fur riled. 

He holds Han to his chest and pets his head.

HAN: I'm all right, pal. I'm all right.

Suddenly the door to the cell opens, and Boba Fett steps in gripping his rifle. Chewie snarls loudly as the door shuts behind Fett. The bounty hunter stares at Han silently. 

HAN: I was just saying the stench couldn’t get any worse, and you show up to make a liar out of me. 

No answer. 

HAN: What’re you doing down here? Jabba got you scrubbing floors in your spare time? 

No answer. Chewie barks in frustration. 

HAN: C’mon, you didn’t come here just to stare! 
BOBA FETT: I’ve beaten you, Solo. 
HAN: Beaten me? You? Vader captured us, Jabba’s got us. All you did was fetch and carry. 
BOBA FETT: Tomorrow I’ll collect another bounty. And you’ll be dead. 
HAN: Don’t worry about me. What about you – you still Jabba’s little errand boy? 
BOBA FETT: Watch your mouth, Solo. I risked my life to get you here. 

Chewbacca gives off a rolling, sarcastic growl. 

HAN: Yeah, Chewie, I think you’re right. You’re not as confident as you want people to think, are you Fett? In fact…you sound a little nervous to me. 

The bounty hunter laughs. 

BOBA FETT: I’m going to enjoy watching you die. 

Fett turns and walks out of the cell. Han shouts after him. 

HAN: You’d better be watching your back!! 

INT. MAIN GATE AND HALL - JABBA'S PALACE

Noisily, the main gate lifts to flood the blackness with blinding LIGHT and reveal the silhouetted figure of LUKE SKYWALKER. He is clad in a black robe similar to Ben's and wears neither pistol nor laser sword. Luke strides purposefully into the hallway. Two giant guards move to block Luke's path. Luke halts.

Luke raises his hand and points at the puzzled guards, who immediately lower their spears and fall back. The young Jedi lowers his hand and moves on down the hallway.

INT. JABBA’S THRONE ROOM

Jabba is asleep on his throne, with Leia lying in front of him. Salacious sits by Jabba's tail, watching it wriggle. Leia is now dressed in the skimpy costume of a dancing girl; a chain runs from a manacle/necklace at her throat to her new master, Jabba the Hutt. Threepio stands behind Jabba. 

INT. MAIN GATE AND HALL – JABBA’S PALACE

Bib Fortuna appears out of the gloom. He speaks to Luke as they approach each other, but Luke doesn't stop and Bib must reverse his direction and hurry alongside the young Jedi in order to carry on the conversation. Several other guards fall in behind them in the darkness.

BIB: Yo mot tu cheep, do yo pan Skywalkah. Jabba mo bath toe baht too. <You must be the one called Skywalker. Jabba will not see you.> 
LUKE: I must speak with Jabba.

Bib answers in Huttese, shaking his head in denial. 

INT. JABBA’S THRONE ROOM 

Leia looks up in recognition of Luke’s voice. 

INT. MAIN GATE AND HALL – JABBA’S PALACE

BIB: Shh. Ee toe seet. Jabba no two zand debank obee. No pahgan. <Shh. The great Jabba is asleep. He has instructed me to tell you there will be no bargain --> 

Luke stops and stares at Bib; he raises his hand slightly.

LUKE: You will take me to Jabba now.
BIB: (dazed) Et tu takku u Jabba now. <I will take you to Jabba now.>

Bib turns in hypnotic response to Luke's command, and Luke follows him into the gloom.

LUKE: You serve your master well.
BIB: Eye sota va locha. <I serve my master well.>
LUKE: And you will be rewarded.
BIB: Ba chu noya trot. <And I will be rewarded.>

INT. JABBA'S THRONE ROOM

Threepio reacts at the sight of Luke, as Bib comes up to the gangster slug.

THREEPIO: At last! Master Luke's come to rescue me.
BIB: Master.

Jabba awakens with a start.

BIB: Gabba no pace Luke Skywalkah. <May I present Luke Skywalker, Jedi Knight.>
JABBA: Nah mass fa wong lee fah toon kay. <I told you not to admit him.>
LUKE: I must be allowed to speak.
BIB: Jedi modst be inco ee. <He must be allowed to speak.>
JABBA: Oowahhh!

Jabba, furious, clobbers Bib and shoves him away.

JABBA: Ko ja vaya sko! Ess turo na om Jedi mine chik. <You weak-minded fool! He's using an old Jedi mind trick.>

Luke pulls down his hood and stares hard at Jabba.

LUKE: You will bring Captain Solo and the Wookiee to me.
JABBA: (laughs) Ya ku kacha ka puni ni sa, ee. <Your mind powers will not work on me, boy.>
LUKE: Nevertheless, I'm taking Captain Solo and his friends. You can either profit by this... or be destroyed. It's your choice, but I warn you not to underestimate my powers.

Jabba's laugh is mean and loud. Threepio attempts to warn Luke about the pit.

THREEPIO: Master Luke, you're standing on -- 
JABBA: Ban hon wan she co cach, o Jedi. Cho kanya wee shaja keecho. <There will be no bargain, young Jedi. I shall enjoy watching you die.>

Luke reaches out, and a pistol jumps out of a guard's holster and flies into Luke's hand. The bewildered guard grabs for it as Jabba raises his fist.

JABBA: Boscka!

Jabba’s fist slams down on the button. The floor suddenly drops away, sending Luke and the hapless guard
into the pit. The pistol goes off, blasting a hole in the ceiling. Jabba laughs and his courtiers join in. Leia starts forward but is restrained by a human guard -- Lando, recognizable behind his mask. She looks at him and he shakes his head "no."

INT. RANCOR PIT

Luke and the guard have dropped twenty-five feet from a chute into the dungeonlike cage. Luke gets to his feet as the guard yells hysterically for help. A crowd gathers up around the edge of the pit as the door in the side of the pit starts to RUMBLE open. The guard screams in panic. Luke looks calmly around for a means of escape.

THREEPIO: Oh, no! The Rancor!

At the side of the pit, an iron door rumbles upward and a giant, fanged RANCOR emerges. The guard runs to the side of the pit and tries futilely to scramble to the top. The hideous beast closes in on him.

INT. JABBA’S THRONE ROOM

The spectators look on. 

INT. RANCOR PIT

The Rancor moves past Luke, and as the guard continues to scramble, the Rancor picks him up and pops him into its slavering jaws. A few screams, and the guard is swallowed with a gulp. 

INT. JABBA’S THRONE ROOM

The audience cheers and laughs at the guard's fate.

INT. RANCOR PIT

The monster turns and starts for Luke. The Jedi suddenly leaps eight meters straight up and grabs onto the overhead grate. 

INT. JABBA’S THRONE ROOM

The crowd begins to boo and hiss. 

INT. RANCOR PIT

Hand over hand, Luke climbs under the grating toward the corner of the cave. One hand slips on the oily grate, and he dangles precariously over the slobbering Rancor. 

INT. JABBA’S THRONE ROOM

Two Jawas run across the top of the grate, mashing Luke’s hand with their rifle butts. The crowd roars in approval. 

INT. RANCOR PIT

Luke finally loses his grip and drops directly into the Rancor’s eye. The Jedi tumbles to the floor as the Rancor screams in pain. It stumbles, batting its’ eye in agony, runs in circles a few times, then spots Luke again and runs at him. 

INT. JABBA’S THRONE ROOM 

Jabba smiles. 

INT. RANCOR PIT

The young Jedi dashes away just ahead of the monster's swipe at him, and picks up the long arm bone of an earlier victim. The monster grabs Luke and brings him up to his salivating mouth. 

INT. JABBA’S THRONE ROOM 

The crowd cheers wildly. Leia can hardly bear to watch. 

INT. RANCOR PIT

At the last moment, Luke wedges the bone in the monster's mouth and is dropped to the floor. The monster bellows in rage and flails about, hitting the side of the pit, causing an avalanche.

The monster crushes the bone in its jaws and sees Luke, who squeezes into a crevice in the pit wall. Luke looks past the monster to the holding cave beyond. On the far side of the holding cave is a utility door--if only he can get to it. The Rancor spots Luke and reaches into the crevice for him. Luke grabs a large rock and raises it, smashing it down on the Rancor's finger.

INT. HOLDING TUNNEL - RANCOR PIT

The Rancor lets out a loud howl as Luke makes a run for the holding cave. He reaches the door and pushes a button to open it. When he succeeds, he sees a heavy barred gate between him and safety. Beyond the gate two guards look up from their dinner. Luke turns to see the monster heading for him, and pulls with all his might on the gate. The guards move to the gate and start poking at the young Jedi with spears, laughing.

INT. JABBA’S THRONE ROOM 

The audience is mad with excitement. 

INT. HOLDING TUNNEL – RANCOR PIT

Luke crouches (against the wall) as the monster starts to reach for him. Suddenly he notices a main door control panel halfway up the wall. As the Rancor moves in for the kill, Luke picks up a skull from the cave floor and hurls it at the panel. The giant overhead door comes crashing down on the beast's head, squashing it like a sledgehammer on an egg.

INT. JABBA’S THRONE ROOM

A startled gasp is heard from the stunned court. There's consternation at this turn of events. Heads look to Jabba, who is actually turning red with anger. 

JABBA: TOOTAH!! AAHHHH!!!!

INT. RANCOR PIT

The beast breathes its last. 

INT. JABBA’S THRONE ROOM

Leia cannot suppress her joy. 

INT. RANCOR PIT

The Rancor KEEPERS have come into the cage and are examining their dead beast. One of them breaks down and weeps. The other glares menacingly at Luke, who is unworried. Several guards rush into the holding tunnel and take Luke away.

INT. JABBA’S THRONE ROOM

Jabba utters harsh commands to his guards and they hurry off.

JABBA: Yon tas Solo chung Wookiee!!! Ko lo yay man dabba kas no!!! <Bring me Solo and the Wookiee!!! They will all suffer for this outrage!!!>

INT. RANCOR PIT

The weeping rancor keeper is consoled and led away. 

INT. THRONE ROOM

The crowd of creepy courtiers parts as Han and Chewie are brought into the throne room, and other guards drag Luke up the steps.

LUKE: Han!
HAN: Luke!
LUKE: Good to see you again, old buddy. Are you all right?
HAN: Fine. Together again, huh?
LUKE: Wouldn't miss it.
HAN: How are we doing?
LUKE: The same as always.
HAN: That bad, huh? Where's Leia?

Luke looks to Leia.

LEIA: I'm here. But I don’t know how much longer I can hold off your slobbering friend here. 
HAN: (to Luke) Look, uh…thanks for trying to spring me, kid. You gave it your best. 

Threepio is standing behind the grotesque gangster as he strokes Leia like a pet cat. Several of the guards, including Lando, bring Luke from the other side of the room. Boba is standing behind Jabba.

JABBA: Tak toy woo nee tong. 

Threepio steps forward and translates for the captives.

THREEPIO: Oh, dear… His High Exaltedness, the great Jabba the Hutt, has decreed that you are to be terminated immediately.
HAN: Good, I hate long waits.
THREEPIO: Your extreme offense against his Majesty demands the most torturous form of death.
HAN: No sense doing things halfway. 
THREEPIO: You will therefore be taken to the Dune Sea and cast into the pit of Carkoon, the nesting place of the all-powerful Sarlacc.
HAN: (to Luke) Doesn't sound so bad.
THREEPIO: In his belly, you will find a new definition of pain and suffering, as you are slowly digested over a thousand years.
HAN: On second thought, let's pass on that, huh?

Chewie barks his agreement. Luke stares at Jabba with a satisfied smile. 

LUKE: You should have bargained, Jabba. This is the last mistake you'll ever make.

Jabba cackles evilly at this.

JABBA: My pek kikin Jedi sapa loy. <And so dies the last of the Jedi.>

As the guards drag the prisoners from the throne room, a loud cheer rises from the crowd. Leia and Chewie exchange concerned looks, but Luke Skywalker, Jedi warrior, cannot suppress a smile.

WIPE TO: 

EXT. TATOOINE DUNE SEA

A herd of wild banthas trek across Tatooine’s dunes. Overhead, Jabba's huge SAIL BARGE moves above the desert surface accompanied by two smaller SKIFFS. 

INT. BARGE OBSERVATION DECK

Jabba’s entire retinue is traveling with him, drinking, eating, and having a good time. 

EXT. TATOOINE DUNE SEA

The sail barge and skiffs continue their journey. 

INT. BARGE OBSERVATION DECK

Jabba the Hutt rides like a sultan in the massive antigravity ship. Leia is watching her friends in one of the skiffs. 

EXT. TATOOINE DUNE SEA -- SKIFF

One of the skiffs glides close, revealing Luke, Han, and Chewie -- all in bonds -- surrounded by guards, one of whom is Lando in disguise.

HAN: I think my eyes are getting better. Instead of a big dark blur, I see a big light blur.
LUKE: There's nothing to see. I used to live here, you know.
HAN: You're gonna die here, you know. Convenient.
LUKE: I wasn’t planning on it. 
HAN: Well, if this is your big plan, so far I’m not impressed. 
LUKE: Jabba’s palace was too well guarded. I had to get you out of there. Just stick close to Chewie and Lando. I've taken care of everything.
HAN: Oh. Great.

Lando leans up close to Luke. 

LANDO: (whisper) Look out for Fett. 

INT. BARGE OBSERVATION DECK

Boba Fett stands by a window of the barge. His gaze never leaves the skiff. 

EXT. TATOOINE DUNE SEA – SKIFF

LANDO: (whisper to Luke) He senses something’s up. 

INT BARGE OBSERVATION DECK

The chain attached to Leia’s neck is pulled tight, and Jabba tugs the scantily clad princess to him.

JABBA: (in Huttese subtitled) Soon you will learn to appreciate me.

Threepio wanders among the Sail Barge aliens, bumping into a smaller droid serving drinks, spilling them all over the place. The stubby droid lets out an angry series of beeps and whistles.

THREEPIO: Oh, I'm terribly sor... Artoo! What are you doing here?

Artoo beeps a quick reply.

THREEPIO: Well, I can see you're serving drinks, but this place is dangerous. They're going to execute Master Luke and, if we're not careful, us too!

Artoo whistles a singsong response.

THREEPIO: Hmm.  I wish I had your confidence.

Artoo beeps off a quick sentence. 

THREEPIO: All part of the plan? What plan? This is another of your fantasies, Artoo. 

EXT. SARLACC PIT

The convoy moves up over a huge sand pit. The Sail Barge stops to one side of the depression, as does the escort skiff. But the prisoner's skiff moves out directly over the center and hovers. At the bottom of the deep cone of sand is a repulsive, mucous-lined hole, surrounded by thousands of needle-sharp teeth. In the center of the hole is a gigantic beak. This is the SARLACC. A plank is extended from the edge of the prisoner's skiff. Guards release Luke's bonds and shove him out onto the plank above the Sarlacc's mouth.

EXT. SAIL BARGE OBSERVATION DECK

Jabba and Leia are now by the rail, watching. Threepio leans forward and the slobbering villain mumbles something to him. As Threepio steps up to a comlink, Jabba raises his arm and the motley array of intergalactic pirates fall silent. 

EXT. SAIL BARGE

Threepio's voice is amplified across loudspeakers.

THREEPIO: Victims of the almighty Sarlacc: His Excellency hopes that you will die honorably. But should any of you wish to beg for mercy…

INT. SAIL BARGE OBSERVATION DECK

Bib listens gleefully. 

EXT. SAIL BARGE

THREEPIO: …the great Jabba the Hutt will now listen to your pleas.

INT. SAIL BARGE OBSERVATION DECK

Jabba waits for the prisoners’ replies, as Artoo zips unnoticed up the ramp to the upper deck. 

EXT. SKIFF

Han steps forward arrogantly and begins to speak.

HAN: Threepio, you tell that slimy piece of worm-ridden…filth… he'll get no such pleasure from us. Right?

Chewie growls his agreement.

HAN: (quick whisper to Chewie) Chewie, am I facing the right way? 

Chewie reassures Han that he is. Artoo appears on the upper deck of the sail barge. 

LUKE: Jabba! This is your last chance. Free us… or die.

Lando moves unobtrusively along the skiff as Luke shoots a quick look of conspiracy to him.

INT SAIL BARGE OBSERVATION DECK

The assembled monsters rock with mocking laughter. Jabba's laughter subsides as he speaks into the comlink.

JABBA: (in Huttese subtitled) Move him into position.

Jabba makes a thumbs-down gesture. Leia looks worried.

EXT. SKIFF -- PLANK

Luke is prodded by a guard to the edge of the plank over the gaping Sarlacc! He exchanges nods with Lando. 

EXT. BARGE – UPPER DECK

Artoo is at the rail, facing the pit. 

EXT. SKIFF – PLANK

Han looks around for a way out of their plight. 

INT. SAIL BARGE OBSERVATION DECK 

Leia waits with bated breath. 

EXT. SKIFF -- PLANK

Luke looks up at Artoo, then gives a jaunty salute: the signal the little droid has been waiting for. 

EXT. BARGE – UPPER DECK

A flap opens in Artoo's domed head.

INT. SAIL BARGE OBSERVATION DECK

JABBA: (in Huttese subtitled) Put him in.

EXT. SKIFF - PLANK

Luke is prodded and jumps off the plank to the cheers of the bloodthirsty spectators. But, before anyone can even perceive what is happening, he spins around and grabs the end of the plank by his fingertips. The plank bends wildly from his weight and catapults him skyward. 

EXT. BARGE – UPPER DECK

Artoo sends Luke’s lightsaber shooting out of his dome, arcing toward him. 

EXT. SKIFF -- PLANK

In midair Luke does a complete flip and drops down on the end of the plank in the same spot he just vacated, but facing the skiff. He casually extends an open palm and -- his lightsaber drops into his hand.

With samurai speed, Luke ignites it and attacks the guard who prodded him off the plank, sending the hapless monster screaming overboard. The other guards swarm toward Luke. He wades into them, lightsaber flashing. Lando struggles with another guard at the back of the skiff.

EXT. SARLACC PIT

A bewildered guard lands in the soft, sandy slope of the pit, and begins sliding. He claws desperately as a Sarlacc tentacle grabs him and pulls him screaming into the viscous mouth.

INT. SAIL BARGE

Jabba watches this and explodes in rage. He barks commands, and the guards around him rush off to do his bidding. The skuzzy creatures watching the action from the window are in an uproar.

EXT. SKIFF

Luke knocks another guard off the skiff and into the waiting mouth of the Sarlacc. He starts to untie Chewie's bonds.

HAN: What’s happening? Y’know, I’m still not getting a clear visual here!
LUKE: We’re a little busy at the moment, Han. Easy, Chewie.

At that moment, the deck gunmen on the barge unleash a series of blasts from a big cannon on the upper deck. Lando is tossed from the deck of the rocking skiff. He manages to grab a rope, and dangles desperately above the Sarlacc pit.

LANDO: Whoa! Whoa! Help!

EXT. UPPER DECK - SAIL BARGE

With two swift strides, the dangerous Boba Fett ignites his rocket pack, leaps into the air, and flies from the barge down to the skiff.

EXT. SKIFF

Boba lands on the skiff and starts to aim his laser gun at Luke, who has freed Han and Chewie from their bonds. 

BOBA FETT: Drop the lightsaber, farmboy!

Before Boba can fire, the young Jedi spins on him, lightsaber sweeping, and hacks the bounty hunter's gun in half.

LUKE: Don’t call me farmboy. 

Immediately, the skiff takes another direct hit from the barge's deck gun. Shards of skiff deck fly. Chewie and Han are thrown against the rail.

HAN: Chewie, you okay? Where is he?

The Wookiee is wounded and he howls in pain. For a moment, Luke is distracted, and in that moment, Boba fires a cable out of his armored sleeve. Instantly, Luke is wrapped in a strong cable, his arms pinned against his side, his sword arm free only from the wrist down. Luke bends his wrist so the lightsaber points straight up to reach the wire lasso and cuts through. Luke shrugs away the cable and stands free.

BOBA FETT: If you won’t be a prisoner, you’ll be a corpse!!
 
Another blast from the Barge's deck gun hits near Boba and he is knocked unconscious to the deck, next to where Lando is hanging.

LANDO: Han! Chewie?
HAN: Lando!

Luke is a little shaken but remains standing as a fusillade brackets him. The second skiff, loaded with guards firing their weapons, moves in on Luke fast. Luke leaps toward the incoming second skiff. The young Jedi leaps into the middle of the second skiff and begins decimating the guards from their midst.

Chewie, wounded, tries to lift himself as he barks directions to Han, guiding him toward a spear which has been dropped by one of the guards. Han searches the deck as Chewie barks directions; finally he grabs hold of the spear. Lando, far below, can’t see any of this. 

LANDO: Um, Han, you’re not still holding that Cloud City thing against me, are you buddy? 

Boba Fett, badly shaken, rises from the deck. He looks over at the other skiff, where Luke is whipping a mass of guards. Boba raises his arm, and aims his lethal appendage.

Chewie barks desperately at Han.

HAN: Boba Fett?! Boba Fett?! Where?

The space pirate turns around blindly, and the long spear in his hand swings in Boba’s direction. Fett blocks the blow with his forearm and again aims at Luke. 

BOBA FETT: Out of my way, you blind fool! You’re next! 

Chewie barks frantically. Han swings his spear in the opposite direction, and it whacks squarely in the middle of Boba's rocket pack.

The impact of the swing causes the rocket pack to ignite. Howling in frustration and dismay, Boba blasts off, flying over the second skiff like a missile, smashing headfirst against the side of the huge Sail Barge and sliding away into the pit. He screams as his armored body makes its last flight past Lando and directly into the mucous-lined mouth of the Sarlacc. The Sarlacc burps. Chewie growls weak congratulations to Han.

HAN: I did that?!? Wish I could’ve seen it. 

INT SAIL BARGE 

Leia turns from the spectacle outside, picks up a statuette and smashes it over a control panel, throwing the observation deck into darkness. She then leaps onto Jabba's throne, and throws the chain that enslaves her over his head around his bulbous neck. Then she dives off the other side of the throne, pulling the chain violently in her grasp. Jabba's flaccid neck contracts beneath the tightening chain. His huge eyes bulge from their sockets and his scum-coated tongue flops out. He trumpets in dismay and outrage. 

LEIA: Now you know how it feels to have a chain around your throat!!

Leia pushes her knee into Jabba’s flabby back, tightening the grip. He gasps and gurgles, trying to shout for help. 

LEIA: (gritting her teeth) Call for help all you want. Your pack of cutthroats are too busy saving their own necks. 

Suddenly, a glass hits Leia’s back. She arches back, crying out in pain. Salacious Crumb, gibbering and hissing, is grabbing and hurtling every loose object he can find at the princess. A metal platter bounces off the throne; a crystal goblet shatters at Leia’s feet. Suddenly, See-Threepio appears and seizes the monkey-creature up into the air. He slams a metal fist into the creature’s face. 

THREEPIO: I’ll save you, Princess Leia!!

The droid and creature go tumbling across the floor of the observation deck, beating each other. Leia returns to choking the life out of Jabba.  

EXT. SKIFF

Luke continues to destroy the aliens on the guards' skiff, as Han extends his spear downward to Lando, who is still dangling precariously from a rope on the prisoner's skiff. Lando jerks his head to avoid having his eyes gouged out by the spear. 

LANDO: You are still sore at me, admit it!!
HAN: If I was, I’d be using the pointy end. Lando, grab it!
LANDO: Lower it!
HAN: I'm trying!

INT. SAIL BARGE

Leia pulls on the chain with all of her strength, bracing herself against Jabba’s back. The Exalted Hutt’s huge tail spasms through its death throes and then slams down into final darkness. 

LEIA: (gasping for breath) You’re…out of business. 

EXT. SKIFF

A major hit from the barge deck gun knocks the skiff on its side. Han and almost everything else on board slides overboard. The rope breaks, and Lando falls to the side of the Sarlacc pit. Luckily, Han's foot catches on the skiff railing and he dangles above Lando and the pit. The wounded Wookiee holds onto the skiff for dear life as another hit from the deck gun rocks the skiff violently.

HAN: Whoa! Whoa! Grab me, Chewie! I'm slipping.

Chewie grabs hold of Han's feet, holding him upside down, as Han extends the spear toward Lando, who is clutching to the side of the pit.

HAN: Grab it! L--Lando. Grab!

Luke finishes off the last guard on the second skiff. He sees the deck gun blasting away at his helpless companions. 

EXT. UPPER DECK – SAIL BARGE

The deck gunner continues to blast away. 

EXT. SKIFF

Luke leaps from the skiff, across a chasm of air, to the sheer metallic side of the Sail Barge. Barely able to get a fingerhold, he begins a painful climb up the hull, when suddenly an ax smashes through a window an inch from his head. With Jedi agility, Luke grasps the wrist holding the ax and yanks the helpless guard through the broken window and into the deadly pit.

The injured Chewie is reaching over the rail for the dangling Han, who is in turn blindly reaching down toward the desperate Lando. The Baron has stopped his slippage down the sandy slope of the Sarlacc pit by lying very still. Every time he tries to reach for Han, the loose sand moves him closer to his final reward.

HAN: Grab it! Almost... You almost got it!

EXT. UPPER DECK – SAIL BARGE

The deck gunner fires again. 

EXT. SKIFF

The blast hits the front of the tilted skiff, causing Lando to let go of the spear.

LANDO: Hold it! Whoa!

EXT. UPPER DECK

The deck gunners have Chewie and the desperate dangling human chain in the gun sights when something up on deck commands their attention. Luke, standing before them like a pirate king, ignites his lightsaber. The deck gunners have barely reached for their pistols before the young Jedi has demolished them. 

EXT. SKIFF 

Again Han extends the spear toward Lando.

HAN: Gently now. All... all right. Now easy, easy. Hold me, Chewie.

Chewie barks a direction. 

HAN: Yeah, I know. I can see a lot better now – must be all the blood rushing to my head. 
LANDO: Great! Now can you just grow a few inches taller? 

Lando screams. One of the Sarlacc's tentacles has wrapped tightly around his ankle, dragging him down the side of the pit.

HAN: Chewie! Chewie, give me the gun. Don't move, Lando.
LANDO: No, wait! I thought you were blind!
HAN: It's all right. Trust me. Don't move.
LANDO: All right! A little higher! Just a little higher!

Han adjusts his aim as Lando lowers his head, and the fuzzy-eyed pirate fires at the tentacle. Direct hit. The tentacle releases Lando, and Chewie starts to pull them on board the skiff.

HAN: Chewie, Pull us up! Come on! Okay... up, Chewie, up!

INT. SAIL BARGE - OBSERVATION DECK

Leia is struggling against her chains in desperation as Artoo zips through the tumult of confused monsters to the rescue; the stubby little droid extends a small laser gun and blasts the chain apart.

LEIA: Come on. We gotta get out of here quick.

Artoo and Leia race for the exit, passing Threepio, who is kicking and screaming as Salacious Crumb, the reptilian monkey-monster, picks out one of the golden droid's eyes.

THREEPIO: Not my eyes! Artoo, help! Quickly, Artoo. Oh! Ohhh! You beast!

Artoo zips over and zaps Salacious, sending him skyward with a scream, crashing into the rafters as Artoo, Leia, and Threepio (with his eye dangling from a wire) hurry off.

EXT. UPPER DECK - SAIL BARGE

Luke is warding off laser blasts with his lightsaber, surrounded by guards and fighting like a demon. Leia emerges onto the deck as Luke turns to face another guard.

LUKE: (to Leia) Get the gun! Point it at the deck!

Leia turns toward the barge cannon, climbs on the platform, and swivels the gun around.

LUKE: Point it at the deck!

A laser blast hits Luke's mechanical hand and he bends over in pain, but manages to swing his lightsaber upward and take out the last of the guards. He looks at the wounded hand, which reveals the mechanism. He flexes the hand; it still works.

Near the rail of the upper deck, Artoo and Threepio steady themselves as Threepio gets ready to jump. Artoo beeps wildly.

THREEPIO: Artoo, where are we going? I couldn't possibly jump…OOHH!!!

Artoo butts the golden droid over the edge and steps off himself with a “Geronimo” whistle, tumbling toward the sand.

EXT. SKIFF

Han leans panting against the rail as Chewie helps Lando onto the deck. The Baron rushes over to the skiff’s controls. 

LANDO: Han, look after Chewie! 
HAN: What about Fett?!?
LANDO: Forget him, he’s finished!

EXT. UPPER DECK – SAIL BARGE

Luke runs along the empty deck toward Leia and the barge gun, which she has brought around to point down at the deck.

LUKE: Come on!

Luke has hold on one of the rigging ropes from the mast. He gathers Leia in his other arm. 

LEIA: Feels kind of familiar, doesn’t it? 
LUKE: Practice makes perfect. Hold tight! 

Luke kicks the trigger of the deck gun. The gun explodes into the deck as Luke and Leia swing out toward the skiff.

EXT. SKIFF

Han is tending to the wounded Chewie as Luke and Leia land on the skiff with flair.

LUKE: Let's go! And don't forget the droids.
LANDO: We're on our way.
HAN: But is Fett dead?!?
LANDO: The way his head hit the hull, he can’t have survived. 
HAN: I’m not leaving ‘till I’m sure! 

Suddenly, the hull of the Sail Barge begins to explode. Han reacts to the sight. 

HAN: Then again, I can be flexible. 

The Sail Barge is exploding in stages in the distance. Half of the huge craft is on fire.

EXT. SAND DUNE

Threepio's legs stick straight up from the dune where he landed. Next to it, Artoo's periscope is the only thing above the sand. The skiff floats above them and two large electromagnets dangle down on a wire. With a loud CLANG, both droids are pulled from the sand.

THREEPIO: Ow. 

EXT. SKIFF

Luke and Han haul the droids aboard the skiff. For the first time, the heroes look at each other and realize they’re all reunited, more or less in one piece. There is a great moment of hugging, laughing, crying and beeping. Then someone accidentally squeezes Chewbacca’s injured arm, and he bellows. The heroes run about, securing the skiff and looking for medical supplies. 

EXT. DUNE SEA

The little skiff skips around the burning Sail Barge, which continues its chain of explosions. As the skiff sails off across the desert, the barge settles to the sand and disappears in one final conflagration.

WIPE TO: 

EXT. DUNE SEA - LANDING AREA

A ferocious sandstorm blocks our view. Then, through the ROAR, we HEAR THE VOICES of our heroes. They emerge slowly from the veil of sand, wearing desert robes, pressing on against the wind. First come Artoo and Threepio, followed by Leia guiding Han, then Luke and Lando come into view, each supporting one side of the towering Chewbacca, who hobbles from his wound.

Soon, they can make out some large vague shapes in the blowing sand. It is the Millennium Falcon and, parked beside it, Luke's trusty X-Wing. They must shout to be heard.

HAN: I don't know. All I can see is a lot of blowing sand!
LEIA: That's all any of us can see.
HAN: (blinking) Then I guess I'm getting better.

As soon as the group huddles under the bulk of the Falcon, the wind dies down to something more describable as a severe weather condition. Threepio hits a switch, and the gangplank lowers with a HUM.

HAN: (turning to Luke) I've got to hand it to you, kid, you were pretty good out there.
LUKE: (shrugging it off) I had a lot of help. Think nothing of it.

Luke starts to walk toward his X-Wing. Han stops him, his manner suddenly quieter and serious. 

HAN: No. I'm thinking a lot about it. That carbon freeze was the closest thing to dead there is. And it wasn't just sleepin'. It was a big wide-awake nothing.

Han hugs Luke tightly, genuine emotion in his face. 

HAN: My eyes aren’t the only things seeing different, old buddy. 

Luke nods, as Chewie growls affectionately at the young Jedi warrior, mussing his hair like a proud uncle. And Leia warmly hugs him. Luke pulls himself away and continues toward his X-Wing along with Artoo. Han looks dubiously at Lando, obviously remembering his friend’s betrayal and subsequent aid. 

HAN: Guess I owe you some thanks too, Lando.
LANDO: Figured if I left you frozen like that you'd just give me bad luck the rest of my life, so I might as well get you unfrozen sooner or later.
LEIA: He means "You're welcome."
LANDO: Come on, let's get off this miserable dust ball.

Han, Leia, Lando, Chewie and Threepio walk up the gangplank into the Falcon. Han pauses, and pats the side of the ship affectionately. 

HAN: You’re looking good, ol’ girl. Never thought I’d see you again. 

He heads up the ramp, and it finally closes. 

EXT. TATOOINE

The Falcon lifts off into the dust-filled air, closely followed by the X-Wing. 

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

Han is back in his familiar pilot’s seat on the Falcon, with Lando in the co-pilot’s seat and Leia and Threepio behind them. The view outside shows the Falcon and X-Wing are flying very low to the sandy dunes. 

LANDO: Stick close, Luke. We’re not outta the woods yet. 
HAN: We never will be, flying this low. 
LEIA: Check your long-range sensors, Han.

Han does, and he lets out a low whistle.

HAN: Star Destroyers…the works. 
LEIA: Just waiting to jump any Rebel assault force that tried to rescue you from Jabba’s.  
HAN: We’d have a better chance of tunneling our way off of Tatooine. 

INT. LUKE’S X-WING – COCKPIT

Luke is at the controls, with Artoo attached behind him outside the canopy. Luke speaks into his comlink to the others, in the MILLENNIUM FALCON.

LUKE: Hey, take a look back at Jabba’s!

EXT. TATOOINE – JABBA’S PALACE

Near Jabba’s palace, an entire flotilla of various smuggler and pirate ships lifts off and races skyward. 

INT. LUKE’S X-WING – COCKPIT

Artoo beeps modestly. 

LUKE: On the Sail Barge, Artoo penetrated Jabba’s data system. His toadies think the Imperials are coming for them with death warrants. So they’re gonna make a fight out of it. 

EXT. SPACE – NEAR TATOOINE

The Star Destroyers and criminal spaceships attack each other, filling the skies with laser fire, flak, and explosions. It’s a real free-for-all. 

INT. LUKE’S X-WING – COCKPIT

LUKE: Ready to run for it? 

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

HAN: Full bore!! 

EXT. TATOOINE

The Millenium Falcon and X-Wing nose upwards, and rockets into the blue skies.  

EXT. SPACE ABOVE TATOOINE

The desolate yellow planet fills the screen. The Falcon appears and grows huge, to roar directly over camera, followed by Luke’s X-Wing, which peels off to the left. 

INT. X-WING - COCKPIT

HAN: (over comlink) Gotta hand it to you, Luke. Right past an Imperial blockade without firing a shot. 
LUKE: The Force was with us, Han. I'll meet you back at the fleet.
LANDO: (over comlink) Clear skies, Luke. 
LEIA: (over comlink) Hurry. The Alliance should be assembled by now.
LUKE: I will.
HAN: (over comlink) Hey, Luke, thanks. Thanks for comin' after me. Now I owe you one.

EXT. X-WING

A message from Artoo appears on the small monitor screen in front of Luke. 

INT. X-WING – COCKPIT

The message from Artoo appears on the small monitor screen in front of Luke. He smiles at the monitor and speaks to Artoo, as he pulls a black glove on to cover his wounded mechanical hand.

LUKE: That's right, Artoo. We're going to the Dagobah system. I have a promise to keep... to an old friend.

EXT. SPACE 

Luke’s X-Wing soars off. 

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

Threepio sits at one of the side consoles, with Lando at the other side. 

LANDO: Threepio, what’s holding up that diagnostic? 
THREEPIO: Sorry, sir. My damaged photoreceptor appears to be giving me a bit of double vision. 

Leia looks at Threepio, surprised at the faint tone of hurt in the golden robot’s voice. She leans over to him. 

LEIA: Are you all right? 
THREEPIO: Well…

Leia rests a hand on Threepio’s shoulder. 

LEIA: I’m sorry we couldn’t let you in Luke’s rescue plan. 
THREEPIO: No, I quite understand. My memory banks are more open to scrutiny than Artoo’s. 
LANDO: When Ninedenine scanned you and found no sign of subterfuge, it put Jabba off his guard. 
HAN: (grins) Corellian Overdrive, huh? 
THREEPIO: Hmm? I’m not sure I fully comprehend that turn of phrase. 
HAN: Corellian Overdrive is doing whatever you need to do to get where you need to go. 
LEIA: Lying. 
LANDO: Stacking the deck. 
LEIA: Oh, and Threepio…thanks for defending me from that creature. It was very brave of you. 

Lando helps Threepio up and out of the cockpit. 

LANDO: Come on, let’s see if we can get your eye fixed. 

Han and Leia are left alone in the cockpit. Leia gazes at Han, who is carefully keeping his eyes from meeting hers. 

LEIA: You’re welcome. 
HAN: (without looking back) Huh? 
LEIA: (sitting in the co-pilot’s seat) Just making it easy on you. You were trying to figure out how to thank me, weren’t you? 
HAN: I was getting around to it. 
LEIA: And? 
HAN: Not a bad rescue. For a princess. 
LEIA: Compared to yours? 
HAN: You’re not in that cell anymore, are you? 
LEIA: You’re not in that slab anymore, are you? 
HAN: All right, all right…

Leia gets up and starts out the cockpit, then pauses and looks back. 

LEIA: While you’re replying in kind…what about the last thing I said to you in Cloud City? Just before Vader froze you? 

A beat. Han struggles with his answer. 

HAN: Uh…whew. A lot of that’s kinda blurry, Leia. 

Leia is slightly disappointed. 

LEIA: Don’t worry. It’ll come back to you. 

She starts to leave again. 

HAN: Oh, Leia…

Leia turns, hopeful. 

LEIA: Yes, Han? 
HAN: Uhh…you gonna throw that slave outfit away? 

Leia smirks, mischievously. 

LEIA: We’ll see. 

She leaves. Han thinks about it, then grins widely. 

EXT. SPACE

The Millenium Falcon soars away, into the starry void. 

WIPE TO: 

EXT. SPACE - DEATH STAR AND ENDOR

The Super Star Destroyer Executor and several ships of the Imperial Fleet rest in space above the half-completed Death Star and its green neighbor, Endor. Four squads of TIE fighters escort an Imperial shuttle toward the Death Star.

INT. DEATH STAR - CORRIDOR TO DOCKING BAY

Lord Vader strides down the hallway, accompanied by a very nervous Moff Jerjerrod.

INT. DOCKING BAY - DEATH STAR

Thousands of Imperial troops in tight formation fill the mammoth docking bay. Vader and the officer walk to the landing platform, where the shuttle is coming to rest.

The shuttle's ramp lowers and the Emperor's Royal Guards come out and create a lethal perimeter. The assembled troops move to rigid attention with a momentous SNAP.

Then, in the huge SILENCE which follows, the EMPEROR appears. He is a rather small, shriveled old man. His bent frame slowly makes its way down the ramp with the aid of a gnarled cane. He wears a hooded cloak similar to the one Ben wears, except that it is black. The Emperor's face is shrouded and difficult to see, except for his piercing yellow eyes. Commander Jerjerrod and Darth Vader kneel to him. 

VADER: Greetings, my Emperor. I kneel before you and wait to execute your will. 

The Supreme Ruler of the galaxy beckons to the Dark Lord.

EMPEROR: (to Vader) Rise, my friend. I would talk with you. 

Vader rises and falls in next to the Emperor as he slowly makes his way along the rows of troops. Jerjerrod and the other commanders stay kneeling until the Supreme Ruler and Vader, followed by several Imperial dignitaries, pass by; only then do they join in the procession.

EMPEROR: You have hastened construction most effectively – and at such a paltry cost in lives. 
VADER: The Death Star will be completed on schedule.
EMPEROR: Yes, I know. You have done well, Lord Vader. And now I sense you wish to continue your search for young Skywalker.
VADER: Yes, my Master.
EMPEROR: Patience, my friend. You always had difficultly showing patience. In time he will seek you out. And when he does, you must bring him before me. He has grown strong. Only together can we turn him to the dark side of the Force.
VADER: As you wish…so shall it be. 
EMPEROR: Everything is proceeding as I have foreseen.

He laughs to himself as they pass along the vast line of Imperial troops.

EXT. YODA'S HOUSE - DAGOBAH

Once again, Artoo finds himself waiting around in the damp environs of the swamp planet, and he's none too happy about it. He beeps disconsolately to himself and turns to look at Yoda's cottage. Warm yellow light escapes the oddly shaped windows to fight the gloom.

INT. YODA'S HOUSE

The tip of a walking stick taps hesitantly across the earthen floor of the cottage. Our view travels up the stick to the small green hand that clutches it, and then to the familiar face of YODA, THE JEDI MASTER. He has lost much weight, and his manner is frail; his voice, though cheerful, seems weaker.

YODA: Hmm. That face you make. Look I so old to young eyes?

Luke is sitting in a corner of the cramped space and, indeed, his look has been woeful. Caught, he tries to hide it.

LUKE: No... of course not.
YODA: (tickled, chuckles) I do. Heh heh…yes, I do.  Sick have I become. Old and weak. (Points a crooked finger) When nine hundred years old you reach, look as good you will not, hmm?

Yoda chuckles at this, coughs, and hobbles over toward his bed.

YODA: Soon will I rest. Yes…forever sleep. Earned it, I have.

Yoda sits himself on his bed, with great effort. Luke is horror-stricken. 

LUKE: Master Yoda, you can't die.
YODA: Strong am I with the Force... but not that strong. Nor would I choose to be. Twilight is upon me and soon night must fall. That is the way of things ... the way of the Force.
LUKE: But I need your help. I've come back to complete the training. This time, I won’t stop until you’re satisfied -- 
YODA: No more training do you require. Already know you that which you need.

Yoda sighs, and lies back on his bed. Luke is floored by Yoda’s statement. 

LUKE: Then I am a Jedi.

Yoda, weak as he is, manages to laugh at that. 

YODA: (shakes his head) No. Not yet. One thing remains: Vader. You must confront Vader. Then, only then, a Jedi will you be. And confront him you will…sooner or later. 

Luke is in agony. He is silent for a long moment, screwing up his courage. Finally he is able to ask.

LUKE: Master Yoda... is Darth Vader my father?

Yoda's eyes are full of weariness and compassion. An odd, sad smile creases his face. He turns painfully on his side, away from Luke.

YODA: Mmm... rest I need. Yes... rest.

Luke watches him, each moment an eternity.

LUKE: Yoda, I must know.

Yoda sighs painfully, and closes his eyes. 

YODA: (a whisper) Your father he is.

Luke reacts as if cut.

YODA: (opens his eyes) Told you, did he?
LUKE: Yes.

A new look of concern crosses Yoda's face.  He closes his eyes again.

YODA: Unexpected this is, and unfortunate...
LUKE: (bitter) Unfortunate that I know the truth?

Yoda opens his eyes again, turns over, and studies the youth.

YODA: (gathering all his strength) No. Unfortunate that you rushed to face him. That incomplete was your training. That not ready for the burden were you. Obi-Wan would have told you long ago, had I let him…now a great burden you carry. Fear for you, I do. Fear for you, yes. 

A great tension seems to pass out of Yoda, and he sinks back on the bed. Luke trembles at the sight of his teacher so weak. 

LUKE: I'm sorry. I did what I thought I had to. 
YODA: I know. But face Vader again you must. Sorry will not help. 

He beckons Luke closer to him. Luke crawls over to sit beside his master. Yoda continues talking, his voice increasingly frail. 

YODA: Whatever happens now, remember -- a Jedi's strength flows from the Force.  But beware.  Anger, fear, aggression. The dark side are they. When you went to Bespin…you had revenge in your heart. Once you start down the dark path, forever will it dominate your destiny.

Yoda lies back in bed, his breath becoming shallow. Luke leans in close to hear him. 

YODA: Luke...Luke...Do not...Do not underestimate the powers of the Emperor, or suffer your father's fate you will. Luke, when gone am I  (cough), the last of the Jedi will you be. 

Yoda begins to falter. He closes his eyes and gathers all his remaining strength for his last words. 

YODA: Luke, the Force runs strong in your family. Pass on what you have learned, Luke... (with great effort) There is... another...s...sky...walk..er…

He catches his breath. A shiver runs through the ancient green creature, and he dies. Luke stares at his dead master as he disappears in front of his eyes, his eyes watering with boundless grief. 

EXT. DAGOBAH SWAMP - X-WING

Luke wanders back to where his ship is sitting. Artoo beeps a greeting, but is ignored by his depressed master. Luke kneels down, begins to help Artoo with the ship, then stops and shakes his head dejectedly.

LUKE: I can't do it, Artoo. I can't go on alone.
BEN: (OS) Yoda will always be with you.

Luke looks up to see the shimmering image of BEN KENOBI.

LUKE: Obi-Wan…

The ghost of Ben Kenobi approaches him through the swamp. Luke stares at his old master with a mixture of anger and bitterness. 

BEN: You must bear in mind all that Yoda taught you, Luke. Your destiny comes swiftly upon you now. 
LUKE: Why, Ben? Why didn’t you tell me? 
BEN: I was going to tell you when you had completed your training. But you found it necessary to run off unprepared. I warned you about your impatience. 
LUKE: You told me Vader betrayed and murdered my father.
BEN: Your father was seduced by the dark side of the Force. He ceased to be Anakin Skywalker and became Darth Vader. When that happened, he betrayed everything and everyone that he had ever believed in. The good man who was your father was destroyed. So what I have told you was true... from a certain point of view.
LUKE: (turning away, derisive) “A certain point of view”?!?
BEN: Luke, you're going to find that many of the truths we cling to depend greatly on our own point of view.
LUKE: You let me think I was training to face my father’s killer. Not to slay my own flesh and blood. 

Ben studies him in silence for a moment.

BEN: I don't blame you for being angry. If I was wrong in what I did, it certainly wouldn't have been for the first time. You see, what happened to your father… was my fault.

Ben pauses sadly.

BEN: Anakin was a good friend.

Luke turns with interest at this. As Ben speaks, Luke settles on a stump, mesmerized. Ben joins him at the side of the stump. Artoo comes over to offer his comforting presence.

BEN: When I first knew him, your father was already a great pilot. But I was amazed how strongly the Force was with him.  I took it upon myself to train him as a Jedi.  I thought that I could instruct him just as well as Yoda.  I was wrong. The Emperor sensed Anakin’s power. And he was able to lure him to the Dark Side. 

Ben’s shoulders slump, from the weight of decades of grief and regret. He looks at Luke, as if asking for forgiveness. 

BEN: (quietly) My pride has had dire consequences for the galaxy.

Luke is entranced.

LUKE: There's still good in him.
BEN: I also thought he could be turned back to the good side. It couldn't be done. He is more machine now than man. Twisted and evil.
LUKE: (shakes his head slowly) I can't do it, Ben.
BEN: You cannot escape your destiny. You must face Darth Vader again. 
LUKE: I tried to stop him once. I couldn't do it.
BEN: Vader humbled you when first you met him, Luke...but that experience taught you, among other things, the value of patience.  Had you not been so impatient to defeat Vader then, you could have finished your training here with Yoda. You would have been prepared.
LUKE: But I had to help my friends.
BEN: And did you help them? It was they who had to save you. You achieved little by rushing back prematurely, I fear.

Luke is somber, quiet. He knows Ben’s right. 

BEN: To be a Jedi, Luke, you must confront and then go beyond the dark side - the side your father couldn't get past. Impatience is the easiest door - for you, like your father. Only, your father was seduced by what he found on the other side of the door, and you have held firm. You're no longer so reckless now, Luke. You are strong and patient. 
LUKE: (sad) I can’t do what you expect of me. I can't kill my own father.

Ben sighs and looks down, defeated. 

BEN: Then the Emperor has already won. Darkness will prevail. You were our only hope.
LUKE: Yoda spoke of another. Perhaps I can train him to --
BEN: The other he spoke of is your twin sister. And she will find it no easier to destroy Vader. 

Luke is visibly jolted by this revelation. 

LUKE: But I have no sister.
BEN: Hmm. To protect you both from the Emperor, you were hidden from your father when you were born. The Emperor knew, as I did, if Anakin were to have any offspring, they would be a threat to him. That is the reason why your sister has remained safely anonymous.

Luke looks within himself, searching through the Force, searching his memories. When he speaks to Ben again, it is with a quiet certainty. 

LUKE: Leia. Leia's my sister.
BEN: Your insight serves you well. Bury your feelings deep down, Luke. They do you credit. But they could be made to serve the Emperor.

Luke looks into the distance, trying to comprehend all this.

BEN: (continuing his narrative) When your father left, he didn't know your mother was pregnant. Your mother and I knew he would find out eventually, but we wanted to keep you both as safe as possible, for as long as possible.  So I took you to live with Owen Lars on Tatooine... and your mother took Leia to live as the daughter of Senator Organa, on Alderaan.

Luke turns, and settles near Ben to hear the tale.

BEN: (attempting to give solace with his words) The Organa household was highborn and politically quite powerful in that system. Leia became a princess by virtue of lineage... no one knew she'd been adopted, of course. But it was a title without real power, since Alderaan had long been a democracy.  Even so, the family continued to be politically powerful, and Leia, following in her foster father's path, became a senator as well.  That's not all she became, of course... she became the leader of her cell in the Alliance against the corrupt Empire. And because she had diplomatic immunity, she was a vital link for getting information to the Rebel cause.  That's what she was doing when her path crossed yours... for her foster parents had always told her to contact me on Tatooine, if her troubles became desperate.

Luke is overwhelmed by the truth, and is suddenly protective of his sister.

LUKE: But you can't let her get involved now, Ben. Vader will destroy her.
BEN: She hasn't been trained in the ways of the Jedi the way you have, Luke ... but the Force is strong with her, as it is with all of your family. Luke – the coming battle is yours alone. You must not deceive yourself, and you mustn’t conjure up false hope. Vader’s vision isn’t clouded by sentiment. Nor is the Emperor’s. And if yours is, when you face them at last, you will be destroyed. But there is no avoiding the battle – you cannot escape your destiny…

Luke slowly, reluctantly, nods. 

WIPE TO: 

EXT. SPACE - REBEL FLEET

The vast Rebel Fleet stretches as far as the eye can see. Overhead a dozen small Corellian battleships fly in formation. Fighters and battlecruisers surround the largest of the Rebel Star Cruisers, the HEADQUARTERS FRIGATE.

INT. HEADQUARTERS FRIGATE - MAIN BRIEFING ROOM

Hundreds of Rebel commanders of all races and forms are assembled in the WAR ROOM. WEDGE ANTILLES is among them. In the center of the room is a holographic model depicting the half-completed Imperial Death Star, the nearby Moon of Endor, and the protecting deflector shield.

MON MOTHMA, the leader of the Alliance, enters the room. She is a stern but beautiful woman in her fifties. Conferring with her are several military leaders, including GENERAL CRIX MADINE and ADMIRAL ACKBAR (a salmon-colored Mon Calamari). Lando moves through the crowd until he finds Han and Chewie, standing next to Leia and the two droids.

Han peers at Lando's new insignia on his chest, and is amused.

HAN: Excuse me, I wanted to tell you – if you ever need a double to trick the Imperials, I know this guy named Lando who looks exactly like you. 
LANDO: Huh?!? What are you babbling about? 
HAN: This fella Lando, he’s not a general, you see. He’s a ladies’ man and a card cheat with a terrible reputation. 
LANDO: “Cheat,” huh? Every time you pick up an honest deck, the face cards start crying. 
LEIA: Don’t pay any attention to him. He’s just jealous. When he went into carbonite, he was the best-looking pilot in the Rebellion. 
HAN: Well, look at you. A General, huh?
LANDO: I am a man of many faces…and many costumes. Someone must have told them about my little maneuver at the battle of Taanab.
HAN: (sarcastic) Well, don't look at me, pal. I just said you were a fair pilot. I didn't know they were lookin' for somebody to lead this crazy attack.
LANDO: That’s all right. I asked for it. I want to lead this attack. 
HAN: Have you ever seen one of those Death Stars? You’re in for a very short generalship, ol’ buddy. 
LANDO: (smiling) I'm surprised they didn't ask you to do it.
HAN: Well, who says they didn't.  But I ain't crazy. You're the respectable one, remember?

Leia moves closer to Han and curls her arm over him protectively. 

LEIA: Han’s staying on the command ship with me. Lando…we’re both very grateful for what you’re doing. And very proud. 

Mon Mothma signals for attention, and the room falls silent.

MON MOTHMA: The data brought to us by the Bothan spies has been confirmed. The Emperor has made a critical error and the time for our attack has come.

This causes a stir. Mon Mothma turns to a holographic model of the Death Star, the Endor moon and the protecting deflector shield in the center of the room.

MON MOTHMA: The data brought to us by the Bothan spies pinpoints the exact location of the Emperor's new battle station. We also know that the weapon systems of this Death Star are not yet operational. With the Imperial Fleet spread throughout the galaxy in a vain effort to engage us, it is relatively unprotected. But most important of all, we've learned that the Emperor himself is personally overseeing the final stages of the construction of this Death Star.

A volley of spirited chatter erupts from the crowd. This is it – the chance no Rebel could have hoped to hope for. A shot at the Emperor himself. Han turns to Leia as Chewie barks his amazement.

MON MOTHMA: (con’t) His journey to Endor was undertaken in utmost secrecy, of course, but he underestimated our spy network. (somber) Many Bothans died to bring us this information. 

She pauses, to let that sink in. 

MON MOTHMA: Admiral Ackbar, please.

Admiral Ackbar steps forward and points to the Death Star's force field and the Moon of Endor.

ACKBAR: You can see here the Death Star orbiting the forest Moon of Endor. Although the weapon systems on this Death Star are not yet operational, the Death Star does have a strong defense mechanism. It is protected by an energy shield, which is generated from the nearby forest Moon of Endor. No ship can fly through it, no weapon can penetrate it. The shield must be deactivated if any attack is to be attempted. Once the shield is down, our cruisers will create a perimeter, while the fighters fly into the superstructure and attempt to knock out the main reactor, (points) somewhere in here. 

There's a concerned murmur.

ACKBAR: (cont) General Calrissian has volunteered to lead the fighter attack. 

Han turns to Lando with a look of respect.

HAN: Good luck.

Lando nods his thanks.

HAN: You're gonna need it.
LANDO: It hasn’t let me down so far. 
ACKBAR: General Madine.

Madine moves center stage.

GENERAL MADINE: We have stolen a small Imperial shuttle, the Tydirium. Disguised as a cargo ship, and using a secret Imperial code, a strike team will land on the moon and deactivate the shield generator.

The assembly begins to mumble among themselves.

THREEPIO: Sounds dangerous.
LEIA: (to Han) I wonder who they found to pull that off.
HAN: Probably some sucker who lost a coin flip. 
GENERAL MADINE: General Solo, is your strike team assembled?

Leia, startled, looks up at Han, surprise changing to admiration.

HAN: Uh, my team's ready. I don't have a command crew for the shuttle.
LEIA: Who’d you lose that coin toss to? Yourself? 
HAN: (grins) You could say that. 

Chewbacca raises his hairy paw and volunteers.  Han looks up at him.

HAN: Well, it's gonna be rough, pal. I didn't want to speak for you.

Chewie waves that off with a huge GROWL.

HAN: (smiles) That's one.
LEIA: Uh, General... count me in. (leans in close) I’m never letting you out of my sight again, your Generalship. 

Han chuckles. 

THREEPIO: While I would not wish to sound presumptuous, Your Highness, I must be included as well. 
LEIA: We couldn’t get along without you. 
MADINE: That still leaves you one officer short. 
HAN: Right, sir. I was thinking --
VOICE: (OS) I'm with you, too!

They turn in that direction and peer into the crowd as there are more cheers. The commanders part, and there at the back stands Luke. Han and Leia are surprised and delighted.

HAN: Looks like the roster’s complete. 
MON MOTHMA: (nods) Time is short. Moreover, we must adjust our own plans to make up for the losses inflicted on us by Lord Vader at the Baji shipyards. So let us now conclude this briefing and divide into operational groups for final preparation. 

The officers nod and start to get up. Leia moves to Luke and embraces him warmly. She senses a change in him and looks into his eyes questioningly.

LEIA: What is it?
LUKE: (hesitant) Ask me again sometime.

Han, Chewie, and Lando crowd around Luke as the assembly breaks up.

LANDO: Commander Skywalker, you have a dramatic sense of timing. 
LUKE: Good to see you too, Lando. 
HAN: Luke. If I were you, I’d have stayed away a little longer. 
LUKE: Hi, Han... Chewie.

Artoo beeps a singsong observation to a worried Threepio.

THREEPIO: "Exciting" is hardly the word I would use.

INT. HEADQUARTERS FRIGATE - MAIN DOCKING BAY

The Millennium Falcon rests beyond the stolen IMPERIAL SHUTTLE, which looks anomalous among all the Rebel ships in the vast docking bay. Chewie barks a final farewell to Lando and leads Artoo and Threepio up the shuttle, crowded now with the Rebel strike team loading weapons and supplies. Lando turns to face Han. Luke and Leia have said their good-byes and start up the ramp.

HAN: Look. I want you to take her. I mean it. Take her. She’ll bring you luck. You need all the help you can get. She's the fastest ship in the fleet.
LANDO: All right, old buddy. You know, I know what she means to you. I'll take good care of her. She-she won't get a scratch. All right?
HAN: (looks at him warmly) Right. I got your promise now. Not a scratch.
LANDO: Hey, the Falcon used to be my ship, remember? I’ve flown that hunk of junk through more tough spots than you have. 
HAN: This one’ll be the toughest, Lando. 
LANDO: What’s it look like, I’m fresh off a moisture farm? 
HAN: I didn’t say that, I just…
LANDO: Look, would you get going, you pirate. I’ll see you soon. 

Han and Lando pause, then exchange salutes.

LANDO: Good luck.
HAN: You, too. Clear skies, Lando. 

Han goes up the ramp. Lando watches him go and then slowly turns away.

INT. IMPERIAL SHUTTLE - COCKPIT

Luke is working on a back control panel as Han comes in and takes the pilot's seat. Chewie, in the seat next to him, is trying to figure out all the Imperial controls.

HAN: You got her warmed?
LUKE: Yeah, she's comin' up.

Chewie growls a complaint.

HAN: No. I don't think the Empire had Wookiees in mind when they designed her, Chewie. How’s that hand, Luke? 
LUKE: It’s fine, Han. 
HAN: You know, we’ve got plenty of spare blasters, Luke. You don’t have to limit yourself…
LUKE: The lightsaber is the only weapon a Jedi needs. Thanks anyway, Han. 
HAN: Huh. 

Han is a bit thrown by the tremendous change in Luke since he saw him last, at Hoth. Luke smiles understandingly. 

LUKE: It’ll be all right, Han. We’ll make it come out right. 
HAN: Wish I had the same confidence in the Force that you do. 
LUKE: For what it’s worth, the Force has confidence in you. 
HAN: Somehow, that doesn’t make me feel any better. 

INT. HEADQUARTERS FRIGATE – MAIN DOCKING BAY

The shuttle warms up. 

INT. IMPERIAL SHUTTLE COCKPIT

Leia comes in from the hold and takes her seat near Luke. Chewie barks and hits some switches. Artoo rolls up and beeps. 

THREEPIO: Artoo says Major Derlin reports his commandos are secured for launch. 

Han's glance has stuck on something out the window: the Millennium Falcon. Leia nudges him gently.

LEIA: Hey, are you awake?
HAN: Yeah, I just got a funny feeling. Like I'm not gonna see her again.

Chewie, hearing this, stops his activity and looks longingly out at the Falcon, too. Leia puts a hand on Han's shoulder.

LEIA: (softly) Come on, General, let's move.

Han snaps back to life.

HAN: Right. Chewie, let's see what this piece of junk can do. Ready, everybody?
LUKE: All set.
THREEPIO: Here we go again.

EXT. SPACE - THE REBEL FLEET

The stolen Imperial shuttle leaves the main docking bay of the Headquarters Frigate and lowers its wings into flight position.

INT. IMPERIAL SHUTTLE -- COCKPIT

HAN: All right, hang on.

EXT. SPACE – THE REBEL FLEET

The Imperial shuttle zooms off into hyperspace. 

EXT. SPACE – DEATH STAR

TIE fighters patrol the surface of the Death Star. A thin spire juts out of the station’s polar surface. 

INT. EMPEROR'S THRONE ROOM

The converted control room is dimly lit, except for a pool of light at the far end. There the Emperor sits in an elaborate control chair before a large window which looks out across the half-completed Death Star to the giant green moon of Endor.

Darth Vader, standing with other members of the Imperial council, cautiously approaches his master. The ruler's back is to Vader. After several tense moments, the Emperor's chair rotates around to face him.

VADER: What is thy bidding, my Master?
EMPEROR: Send the fleet to the far side of Endor. There it will stay until called for.
VADER: What of the reports of the Rebel fleet massing near Sullust?
EMPEROR: It is of no concern. Soon the Rebellion will be crushed and young Skywalker will be one of us. Your work here is finished, my friend. Go out to the command ship and await my orders.
VADER: Yes, my Master.

Vader bows, then turns and exits the throne room as the Emperor walks toward the waiting council members.

EXT. SPACE - DEATH STAR - MOON

There is a great deal of Imperial traffic in the area as construction proceeds on the Death Star. Transports, TIE fighters, and a few Star Destroyers move about. Now the huge Super Star Destroyer announces itself with a low roar and soon fills the frame.

INT. STOLEN IMPERIAL SHUTTLE - COCKPIT

Han looks back at Luke and Leia as Chewie flips several switches. Through the viewscreen, the Death Star and the huge Super Star Destroyer can be seen.

LEIA: Coming up on their detection perimeter now, Han. 
HAN: Cue up the IFF transponder. And stay sharp. If they don't go for this, we're gonna have to get outta here pretty quick, Chewie.

Chewie growls his agreement.

THREEPIO: Another Death Star! Just the sight of it has my transponders in flux. 
LUKE: Steady, Threepio. 

Artoo beeps encouragement to his metal friend. 

CONTROLLER: (over radio) We have you on our screen now. Please identify.
HAN: Shuttle Tydirium requesting deactivation of the deflector shield.

EXT. SPACE – DEATH STAR – MOON

The Imperial shuttle approaches the Death Star. 

INT. SUPER STAR DESTROYER -- BRIDGE

CONTROLLER: (into radio) Shuttle Tydirium, transmit the clearance code for shield passage.

INT. STOLEN IMPERIAL SHUTTLE – COCKPIT

HAN: Transmission commencing.

Leia and Chewbacca listen tensely as the sound of a high speed transmission begins.

LEIA: Now we find out if that code is worth the price we paid.
HAN: It'll work. It'll work.

Chewie whines nervously. Luke stares at the Huge Super Star Destroyer that looms ever larger before them.

LUKE: Vader's on that ship.
HAN: Now don't get jittery, Luke. There are a lot of command ships. Keep your distance though, Chewie, but don't look like you're trying to keep your distance.

Chewie barks a question.

HAN: I don't know.  Fly casual.

Chewie barks his worries as the Super Star Destroyer grows larger out the window.

THREEPIO: Would this fall under the definition of “Corellian Overdrive,” General Solo? 
HAN: Only if it works. 

INT. VADER'S STAR DESTROYER - BRIDGE

Lord Vader stands, back to us, staring out a window at the Death Star. Now, some vibration felt only by him causes him to turn. After a moment of stillness, he walks down the row of controllers to where ADMIRAL PIETT is leaning over the tracking screen of the controller we've seen earlier. Piett straightens at Vader's approach.

VADER: Where is that shuttle going?
PIETT: (into comlink) Shuttle Tydirium, what is your cargo and destination?
PILOT VOICE (HAN): (filtered) Parts and technical crew for the forest moon.

The Bridge Commander looks to Vader for a reaction.

VADER: Do they have a code clearance?
PIETT: It's an older code, sir, but it checks out. I was about to clear them.

Vader looks upward, as he senses Luke's presence.

VADER: I have a strange feeling about that ship…

INT. STOLEN IMPERIAL SHUTTLE – COCKPIT

LEIA: They’re taking a long time with that code clearance…
LUKE: I’m endangering the mission. I shouldn’t have come. 
HAN: It’s your imagination, kid. Come on. Let’s keep a little optimism here. 

EXT. SPACE – STOLEN IMPERIAL SHUTTLE – DEATH STAR

The shuttle continues on its way, passing the bridge tower of the Super Star Destroyer closely. 

INT. VADER’S STAR DESTROYER -- BRIDGE

PIETT: Shall I hold them?
VADER: No. Leave them to me. I will deal with them myself.
PIETT: (surprised) As you wish, my lord.  (to controller) Carry on.

Piett nods at controller, who switches on his comlink.

INT. STOLEN IMPERIAL SHUTTLE - COCKPIT

The group waits tensely.

HAN: They're not goin' for it, Chewie.
CONTROLLER: (filtered) Shuttle Tydirium, deactivation of the shield will commence immediately. Follow your present course.

Everyone breathes a sigh of relief. Everyone but Luke, who looks worried. Chewie barks.

HAN: Okay! I told you it was gonna work. No problem. Told you Vader wasn’t around, Luke. You think he’d let us breeze in here if he was? 
LUKE: I wonder…

EXT. SPACE - STOLEN IMPERIAL SHUTTLE - ENDOR

The stolen Imperial shuttle moves off toward the green Sanctuary Moon.

INT. VADER’S STAR DESTROYER – BRIDGE

Vader watches from the bridge. He turns and speaks to the controller. 

VADER: Ready my shuttle. I must go to the Emperor. 

He quickly strides off. 

EXT. ENDOR – FOREST CANOPY 

The shuttle comes in to land. 

EXT. FOREST LANDING SITE - ENDOR

The stolen Imperial shuttle sits in a clearing of the moon's dark, primeval forest, dwarfed by the ancient towering trees.

On an adjacent hill, the helmeted Rebel contingent makes its way up a steep trail. Leia and Han are slightly ahead of Chewie and Luke. The troops of the strike-team squad follow, with Artoo and Threepio bringing up the rear. Artoo beeps.

THREEPIO: No, I don’t think it’s pretty here. With our luck, it’s inhabited solely by droid-eating monsters. 

A trooper lifts a finger and glares at Threepio. 

TROOPER: Shh!!
THREEPIO: (whisper) Quiet, Artoo. 

Up ahead, Chewie and Leia reach a crest in the hill and drops suddenly to the ground, signaling the rest of the group to stop. Han and Luke crawl up to take a look.

THREEPIO: (to Artoo) Oh, I told you it was dangerous here.

THEIR POV. Not far below them, two IMPERIAL SCOUTS are wandering through bushes in the valley below. Their two ROCKET BIKES are parked nearby.

LEIA: Shall we try and go around?
HAN: It'll take time. This whole party'll be for nothing if they see us.
LEIA: Is it just the two of them? 
LUKE: (grins) Let’s take a look. 

Leia motions for the squad to stay put, then she, Han, Luke and Chewie start quietly down.

EXT. FOREST CLEARING - CAMPSITE

The four friends make their way to the edge of the clearing not far from the two Imperial scouts.

HAN: Chewie and I will take care of this. You stay here.
LUKE: Quietly, there might be more of them out there.
HAN: (grins) Hey... it's me.

Han and Chewie turn and start through the bushes toward the scouts. Luke and Leia exchange smiles.

LEIA: What’d you expect? 

Han sneaks up behind one of the scouts, steps on a twig and the scout whirls, knocking Han into a tree. The scout shouts for his companion.

SCOUT #1: Go for help! Go!

The second scout jumps on his speeder bike and takes off, but Chewie gets off a shot on his crossbow laser weapon, causing the scout to crash into a tree. Han and Scout #1 are in a rousing fistfight.

LUKE: (sarcastic) Great. Come on.

Luke starts for the scuffle, followed by Leia with her laser pistol drawn. As they run through the bushes, Leia stops and points to where two more scouts are sitting on their speeder bikes, with an unoccupied bike parked nearby.

LEIA: Over there! Two more of them!
LUKE: I see them. Wait -- Leia!

But Leia doesn't hear him and races for the remaining speeder bike. She starts it up and takes off as Luke jumps on the bike behind her.

LUKE: (pointing to the controls) Quick! Jam their comlink. Center switch!

Luke and Leia speed into the dense foliage in hot pursuit, barely avoiding two huge trees.

HAN: Hey, wait! Ahhh!

He flips the remaining scout to the ground.

EXT. FOREST - THE BIKE CHASE

The two fleeing Imperial scouts have a good lead as Luke and Leia pursue through the giant trees at 200 miles an hour, the fire from their bike's laser cannon hitting harmlessly near the moving targets.

LUKE: Move closer!
LEIA: Do you drive as well from the front seat, Luke? 

Leia guns it, closing the gap, as the two scouts recklessly veer through a narrow gap in the trees. One of the bikes SCRAPES a tree, slowing the scout.

LUKE: Get alongside that one!

Leia pulls her speeder bike up so close to the scout's bike that their steering vanes SCRAPE noisily. Luke leaps from his bike to the back of the scout's, grabs the Imperial warrior around the neck, and flips him off the bike, into a thick tree trunk. Luke gains control of the bike and follows Leia, who has pulled ahead. They tear off after the remaining scout.

LUKE: Get him!

The speeding chase passes TWO MORE IMPERIAL SCOUTS. These two swing into pursuit, chasing Luke and Leia, firing away with their laser cannons. The two Rebels look behind them just as Luke's bike takes a glancing hit.

LUKE: (indicating the one ahead) Keep on that one! I'll take these two!

With Leia shooting ahead, Luke suddenly slams his steering vanes into the braking mode. Luke's bike is a blur to the two pursuing scouts as they zip by him on either side. Luke slams his bike into forward and starts firing away, having switched places with his pursuers in a manner of seconds. Luke's aim is good and one scout's bike is blasted out of control. It explodes against a tree trunk.

The scout's cohort takes one glance back at the flash and shifts into turbo drive, going even faster. Luke keeps on his tail.

FAR AHEAD, Leia and the first scout are doing a highspeed slalom through the death-dealing trunks. Now Leia aims her bike skyward and rises out of sight.

The scout turns in confusion, unable to see his pursuer. Suddenly, Leia dives down upon him from above, cannon blasting. The scout's bike takes a glancing hit.

Leia moves in alongside him. The scout eyes her beside him, reaches down, and pulls out a handgun. Before Leia can react, the scout has blasted her bike, sending it out of control. Leia dives off as her bike explodes against a tree. The happy scout looks back at the explosion. But when he turns forward again, he is on a collision course with a giant fallen tree. He hits his brakes to no avail and disappears in a conflagration.

ANOTHER PART OF THE FOREST: Luke and the last remaining scout continue their weaving chase through the trees. Now Luke moves up close. The scout responds by slamming his bike into Luke's. A fallen tree forms a bridge across their path. The scout zips under. Luke goes over the top and crashes his bike down on the scout's. Both riders look ahead - a wide trunk looms directly in Luke's path, but the scout's bike beside him makes it almost impossible for him to avoid it. Luke banks with all his might, leaning almost horizontal over the scout's bike, and is able to make it by, just clipping the tree. When he straightens, he and the scout discover that their two bikes have locked front vanes and are moving as one.

Another big tree looms in Luke's path. He reacts instinctively and dives off his bike. The two bikes come apart a second before Luke's explodes against a tree. The scout sweeps out and circles back to find Luke.

Luke rises from the undergrowth as the scout bears down on him and opens fire with his laser cannon. Luke ignites his laser sword and begins deflecting the bolts. The scout's bike keeps coming and it appears that in a second it will cut Luke in half. At the last instant, Luke steps aside and chops off the bike's control vanes with one mighty slash. The scout's bike begins to shudder, then, pitching and rolling, it rises up to slam directly into a tree in a giant ball of fire.

EXT. SCOUT CAMPSITE - FOREST

Han, Chewie, and the droids, along with the rest of the squad, wait anxiously in the clearing. 

HAN: Major Derlin, set up a comlink surveillance. Maybe if that jamming stops we can eavesdrop on the Imperial frequencies.

Artoo's radar screen sticks out of his domed head and revolves, scanning the forest. He beeps.

THREEPIO: Oh, General Solo, somebody's coming. Oh!

Han, Chewie, and the rest of the squad raise their weapons.

Luke steps out of the foliage to find the weapons trained on him. He's too tired to care. He plops himself down on a boulder and looks around.

HAN: Luke! Hard day, huh kid? 
LUKE: (grins) Wait’ll we get to that generator. 
HAN: Where's Leia?
LUKE: (concerned) What? She didn't come back?
HAN: I thought she was with you.
LUKE: We got separated.

Luke and Han exchange a silent, grim look. Artoo beeps out a quick, frantic sentence. 

THREEPIO: Sirs, Artoo reports that the jamming stopped a short while ago. But there has been no comlink response from the princess yet. 
LUKE: It was Leia doing the jamming…

Luke gets up wearily.

LUKE: Hey, we better go look for her.
HAN: Don’t you want to rest a while? 
LUKE: I want to find Leia. 

Han nods, and signals to a Rebel officer.

HAN: Take the squad ahead.  We'll meet at the shield generator at 0300.
LUKE: Come on, Artoo.  We'll need your scanners.

Luke, Chewie, Han, and the droids move off in one direction as the squad proceeds in another.

THREEPIO: Don't worry, Master Luke.  We know what to do.

They move off into the woods.

THREEPIO: (to Artoo) And you said it was pretty here. Ugh!

EXT. FOREST CLEARING - LEIA'S CRASH SITE

A strange little furry face with huge black eyes comes slowly into view. The creature is an EWOK, by the name of WICKET. He seems somewhat puzzled, and prods Leia with a spear. The princess groans; this frightens the stubby ball of fuzz and he prods her again. 

LEIA: Cut it out!

Leia sits up and stares at the three-foot-high Ewok. She tries to figure out where she is and what has happened. Her clothes are torn; she's bruised and disheveled.

The Ewok jumps up and holds his four-foot-long spear in a defensive position. Leia watches him as he circles warily and begins poking her with the sharp point of the spear.

She stands up, and the Ewok quickly backs away.

LEIA: I'm not gonna hurt you. I just want to see what happened to my bike here…

Leia looks around at the dense forest, and at the charred remains of her speeder bike, then sits down, with a sigh, on a fallen log.

LEIA: Well, looks like I'm stuck here. Trouble is, I don't know where here is.

She puts her head in her hands to rub away some of the soreness from her fall. She looks over at the watchful little Ewok and pats the log beside her.

LEIA: Well, maybe you can help me. Come on, sit down.

Wicket holds his spear up warily and growls at her like a puppy. Leia pats the log again.

LEIA: I promise I won't hurt you. Now come here.

More growls and squeaks from the little bear creature.

LEIA: All right. Our reports didn’t say Endor had intelligent lifeforms. You look well fed, I’ll say that for you. You want something to eat?

She takes a scrap of food out of her pocket and offers it to him. Wicket takes a step backward, then cocks his head and moves cautiously toward Leia, chattering in his squeaky Ewok language.

LEIA: That's right. Come on. Hmmm?

Sniffing the food curiously, the Ewok comes toward Leia and sits on the log beside her. She takes off her helmet, and the little creature jumps back, startled again. He runs along the log, pointing his spear at her and chattering a blue streak. Leia holds out the helmet to him.

LEIA: Look, it's a hat. It's not gonna hurt you. Look. You're a jittery little thing, aren't you?

Reassured, Wicket lowers his spear and climbs back on the log, coming to investigate the helmet. 

LEIA: You wouldn’t happen to have a comlink on you, by any chance? 

Wicket blinks at her, mystified. Leia smiles. 

LEIA: I guess not. 

Suddenly his ears perk up and he begins to sniff the air. He looks around warily, whispering some Ewokese warning to Leia.

LEIA: What is it?

Suddenly a laser bolt comes out of the foliage and explodes on the log next to Leia. Leia and Wicket both roll backwards off the log, hiding behind it. Leia holds her own laser gun ready, while Wicket disappears underneath the log. Another shot, and still no sight of anyone in the forest. Then Leia senses something and turns to find a large IMPERIAL SCOUT standing over her with his weapon pointed at her head. He reaches out his hand for her weapon.

SCOUT #l: Freeze!  Come on, get up!

She hands the weapon over, as a second scout emerges from the foliage in front of the log.

SCOUT #1: Go get your ride and take her back to base.
SCOUT #2: Yes, sir.

The second scout starts toward his bike, as Wicket, crouched under the log, extends his spear and hits the first scout on the leg. The scout jumps and lets out an exclamation, and looks down at Wicket, puzzled. Leia grabs a branch and knocks him out. She dives for his laser pistol, and the second scout, now on his bike, takes off. Leia fires away and hits the escaping bike, causing it to crash into the first scout's bike, which flies end over end and explodes. The forest is quiet once more. Wicket pokes his fuzzy head up from behind the log and regards Leia with new respect. He mumbles his awe. Leia hurries over, looking around all the time, and motions the chubby little creature into the dense foliage.

LEIA: Come on, let's get outta here.

As they move into the foliage, Wicket takes the lead. He shrieks and tugs at Leia to follow him.

EXT. DEATH STAR SURFACE

TIE fighters patrol. 

INT. DEATH STAR - CORRIDOR TO EMPEROR'S TOWER

Darth Vader walks down the corridor to the Emperor's Tower and private elevator, with Moff Jerjerrod and several stormtroopers rushing to keep up with him. The Emperor's private guard steps in Vader's path.

JERJERROD: The Emperor does not wish to be disturbed at the moment!! It is his command -- 

Vader raises his gloved hand toward Jerjerrod’s throat. The commander begins choking, his knees buckling. Vader waves his other hand at the guard. 

VADER: The Emperor will see me now!
GUARD: (repeating Vader's command) The Emperor will see you now…

The guard steps aside. Vader enters the elevator, and the invisible chokehold on Jerjerrod is released. The Moff tries to follow Vader, but the guard lashes out with his force pike and sends an electric shock through the officer. The elevator door closes as Jerjerrod howls in pain. 

INT. EMPEROR'S TOWER - THRONE ROOM

Two red Imperial Guards stand watch at the elevator as the door opens to reveal Vader. Vader enters the eerie, foreboding throne room. It appears to be empty. His footsteps echo as he approaches the throne. He waits, absolutely still. The Emperor sits with his back to the Dark Lord.

EMPEROR: I told you to remain on the command ship.
VADER: A small Rebel force has penetrated the shield and landed on Endor.
EMPEROR: (no surprise) Yes, I know.
VADER: (after a beat) My son is with them.
EMPEROR: (very cool) Are you sure?
VADER: I have felt him, my Master.
EMPEROR: Strange, that I have not. I wonder if your feelings on this matter are clear, Lord Vader.

Vader knows what is being asked.

VADER: They are clear, my Master.
EMPEROR: Then you must go to the Sanctuary Moon and wait for them.
VADER: (skeptical) He will come to me?
EMPEROR: Yes…of his own free will. I have foreseen it. His compassion for you will be his undoing. He will come to you and then you will bring him before me.
VADER: (bows) As you wish.

The Dark Lord strides out of the throne room.

EXT. FOREST CLEARING - LEIA'S CRASH SITE

Han, Luke, Chewie, and the two droids are spread out as they move through the heavy foliage near the clearing where we last saw Leia. Luke finds Leia's helmet, picks it up with an expression of concern.

HAN: (OS) Luke! Luke!

Luke runs with the helmet to where Han has found the charred wreckage of a speeder bike in the grass.

LUKE: Did you find her? 
THREEPIO: Oh, Master Luke. If only we had. 
LUKE: There's two more wrecked speeders back there. And I found this.

He tosses the helmet to Han.

THREEPIO: I'm afraid that Artoo's sensors can find no trace of Princess Leia.
HAN: I hope she’s nowhere near here. 
LUKE: Leia definitely survived the wreck. Looks like she ran into two of them. 
HAN: (gravely) I hope she's all right.
LUKE: Can’t Chewie track her? 

Chewbacca growls in frustration. 

HAN: He says something else has been here. Something beside stormtroopers. Whatever it was, it left no tracks, and Chewie thinks it covered Leia’s, too. 
THREEPIO: Oh dear. Something is stalking the princess? 
LUKE: That doesn’t make sense. Why would -- 

Chewbacca growls, sniffing the air, then, with a bark, pushes off through the foliage.

HAN: What, Chewie? What? Chewie!

The others rush to keep up with the giant Wookiee. As he scoots along, Artoo whistles nervously.

THREEPIO: Picking up what? Try to be more specific, would you? 

EXT. FOREST - DENSE FOLIAGE

The group has reached a break in the undergrowth. Chewie walks up to a tall stake planted in the ground. There is a dead animal hanging from it.

HAN: Hey, I don't get it.

The rest of the group joins the Wookiee around the stake.

HAN: (cont) Nah, it's just a dead animal, Chewie.

Chewie can't resist. He reaches toward the meat.

LUKE: Chewie, wa-wait!  DON’T!!!

Too late. The Wookiee has already pulled the animal from the stake. SPROOING! The group finds itself hanging upside down in an Ewok net, suspended high above the clearing. Artoo lets out a wild series of beeps and whistles, and Chewie howls his regret. Their bodies are a jumble in the net. Han removes a Wookiee paw from his mouth.

HAN: Nice work. Great, Chewie! Great! Always thinking with your stomach. Oldest trap in the galaxy…
LUKE: Will you take it easy? Let's just figure out a way to get out of this thing. (trying to free an arm) Han, can you reach my lightsaber?
HAN: Yeah, sure.

Artoo is at the bottommost point in the net. He extends his cutting appendage and begins slicing at the net. Han is trying to squeeze an arm past Threepio to get at Luke's lightsaber. The net continues to spin.

THREEPIO: Artoo, I'm not sure that's such a good idea. It's a very long dro-o-op!!

Artoo has cut through and the entire group tumbles out of the net, crashing to the ground. As they regain their senses and sit up, they realize they are surrounded by dozens of Ewoks, each brandishing a long spear.

HAN: Wha--?  Hey!  Point that thing someplace else.

Han pushes the spear wielded by TEEBO out of his face and a second Ewok warrior comes up to argue with Teebo. The spear returns to Han's face. He grabs it angrily and starts to go for his laser pistol.

HAN: Hey!
LUKE: Han, no blasters! They’ve got us covered from all sides. 
HAN: Captured by a pack of stone-axe-wavin’ gremlins. I’m never gonna live this down…
LUKE: Han, don't. It'll be all right.

The Ewoks swarm through them and confiscate their weapons. Luke lets them take his lightsaber. Chewie growls at the furry critters.

LUKE: Chewie, give 'em your crossbow.

Artoo and Threepio are just untangling themselves. Threepio gets free of the net and sits up, rattled.

THREEPIO: Oh, my head… Oh, my goodness!

When the Ewoks see Threepio, they let out a gasp and chatter among themselves.

THREEPIO: Master Luke, what are these creatures? 
LUKE: That’s what you’re supposed to be telling us. 
THREEPIO: I shall enquire. (to the Ewoks) Treetoe doggra. Ee soyoto ambuna nocka. 

The Ewok nearest him drops his spear and prostrates himself before the droid. In a moment, all the Ewoks have followed suit. Chewie lets out a puzzled bark. Han and Luke regard the bowed creatures in wonder. The Ewoks begin to chant at Threepio.

LUKE: Do you understand anything they're saying?
THREEPIO: Oh, yes, Master Luke!  Remember that I am fluent in over six million forms of communication.
HAN: What are you telling them?
THREEPIO:  “Hello”, I think... I could be mistaken. These creatures seem to call themselves Ewoks. 
HAN: What’re they all bowing and crooning to you for, Goldenrod? 
THREEPIO: They're using a very primitive dialect.  But I do believe they think I am some sort of god.

Chewbacca and Artoo think that's very funny, roaring and beeping with laughter. Han and Luke exchange "what next?" looks.

HAN: Well, why don't you use your divine influence and get us out of this?
THREEPIO: I beg your pardon, General Solo, but that just wouldn't be proper.
HAN: Proper?!
THREEPIO: It's against my programming to impersonate a deity.

Han moves toward Threepio threateningly.

HAN: Why, you pile of bolts--

Several Ewoks' spears are thrust in Han's face at the affront to their god. The Ewoks move in to protect their god and Han is surrounded by a menacing circle of spears, all aimed at him. He holds up his hands placatingly.

HAN: My mistake. He's an old friend of mine.

Teebo turns and jabbers out a plan of action to his comrades. The Ewoks chatter amongst themselves as they start chopping branches, and assembling poles and a carry-chair. Several more Ewoks stand guard over the heroes. 

LUKE: What are they doing? 
THREEPIO: Teebo, the war party leader, has decided to take us back to their village. They are building a sedan chair for me and – I’m sorry to say – poles to carry you. 

Chewie roars loudly at this. 

HAN: Nobody’s tying me to a pole. 
LUKE: Han, the whole attack’s riding on what we do now. Let’s be diplomatic…

EXT. FOREST - SERIES OF SHOTS

A procession of Ewoks winds through the ever-darkening forest. Their prisoners - Han, Luke, Chewie, and Artoo - are tied to long poles. Each pole is carried on the shoulders of several Ewoks. Behind the captives, Threepio is carried on a litter, like a king, by the remaining creatures.

EXT. FOREST WALKWAY - MOON FOREST

The procession moves along a shaky, narrow, wooden walkway, high in the giant trees. It stops at the end of the walkway, which drops off into nothingness. On the other side of the abyss is a village of mud huts and rickety walkways, attached to the giant trees. The lead Ewok takes hold of a long vine and swings across to the village square; the other Ewoks follow suit.

EXT. EWOK VILLAGE SQUARE

The procession winds its way into the village square. Mother Ewoks gather their babies up and scurry into their huts at the sight of the newcomers. The group stops before the largest hut.

Han, Luke, Chewie, and Artoo are still bound to their poles. Han is placed on a spit above what looks like a barbecue pit and the others are leaned against a tree nearby. Threepio's litter/throne is gently placed near the pit. He watches with rapt fascination. Han, Luke, and Chewie are less than fascinated.

HAN: I have a really bad feeling about this.

Chewie growls his concern.

Suddenly all activity stops as LOGRAY, the tribal Medicine Man, comes out of the big hut. He examines the captives carefully, goes to join Threepio, whose throne has been placed on an elevated platform. A larger, gray-haired Ewok, CHIEF CHIRPA, is examining Luke's lightsaber with great curiosity.

Logray speaks to Threepio and the assemblage of fuzzy Ewoks, pointing to the prisoners tied to the stakes. The Ewoks begin filling the pit under Han with firewood.

THREEPIO: As I understand it, the forest has been invaded by stormtroopers. The Ewoks presume you to be enemies. 
LUKE: Threepio, I think it’s time you spoke on our behalf. 
THREEPIO: Excuse me. (to Logray) Ab toyam nowb. Ab toyam, no. Hud, ha toy. Ee cotra popeeya. 

Logray makes a general announcement in Ewokese. 

HAN: What did he say?
THREEPIO: I'm rather embarrassed, General Solo, but it appears you are to be the main course at a banquet in my honor. Logray is quite offended that I should suggest otherwise. And you, Artoo, are to be reclaimed for useable scrap. 

Artoo blatts in outrage. 

THREEPIO: Don’t blame me. That’s how Logray phrased it. 
HAN: Luke, time to get undiplomatic yet? 

The drums start beating, and all the furry heads turn to the large hut. Leia emerges, with her hair lowered to her knees and wearing an animal-skin dress. She sees what's happening at the same moment the prisoners see her.

HAN and LUKE: Leia!

As she moves toward them, the Ewoks block her way with raised spears.

LEIA: Oh!
THREEPIO: Your Royal Highness.

Artoo and Chewie chime in with their welcome. Leia looks at the assembled Ewoks and sighs.

LEIA: But these are my friends. Threepio, tell them they must be set free.
THREEPIO: Roke ta toe-toe. In neen chandu toma tiktik. Ree peetah bah. 

Chirpa and Logray listen and shake their heads negatively. The Medicine Man gestures toward the prisoners and barks some orders. Several Ewoks jump up and pile more wood on the barbecue with vigor. Leia trades frantic looks with Luke and Han.

HAN: Somehow, I got the feeling that didn't help us very much.
LEIA: Luke, what can we do?!?

Han starts to say something, then frowns as he notices Leia’s intense faith in Luke. 

LUKE: Threepio, tell them if they don't do as you wish, you'll become angry and use your magic.
THREEPIO: But Master Luke, what magic? I couldn't possibly --
LUKE: Just tell them.
THREEPIO: Horomee ana fu, toron togosh!!

The Ewoks are disturbed, and the drum beat suddenly stops. 

THREEPIO: (con’t) Toron togosh! Terro way. Qee t’woos twotoe ai. U wee da dozja…BOOM!!!

The Ewoks are intimidated by the ultimatum. Logray steps forward and calls Threepio’s bluff. Luke closes his eyes and begins to concentrate.

THREEPIO: You see, Master Luke; they didn't believe me. Just...

Now the litter/throne, with Threepio sitting upon it, rises from the ground. At first Threepio doesn't notice and keeps talking.

THREEPIO: ... as I said they wouldn't -- Wha-wha-what's happening! Oh! Oh, dear! Oh!

The Ewoks fall back in terror from the floating throne. Now Threepio begins to spin as though he were on a revolving stool, with Threepio calling out in total panic at his situation.

THREEPIO: Put me down! He-e-elp! Master Luke! Artoo! Somebody, somebody, help! Master Luke, Artoo!
Artoo, quickly! Do something, somebody! Oh! Ohhh!

Chief Chirpa yells orders to the cowering Ewoks. They rush up and release the bound prisoners. Logray orders the little droid cut down. Artoo crashes to the ground. When the Ewoks set him upright, the little droid is fighting mad. Artoo beeps a blue streak at the nearest Ewok, and begins pursuing him, finally getting close enough to zap him with an electric charge. The Ewok jumps two feet in the air and runs away, screaming. Han enfolds Leia in an embrace. A small group of Ewoks surround the giant Wookiee, scratching their heads and marveling at his height. Luke notices the spinning Threepio, with Artoo beeping up at him, and slowly lowers the golden droid and the throne to the ground.

THREEPIO: Oh, oh, oh, oh! Thank goodness.
HAN: Luke, can you do that with dice? 
LUKE: Thanks, Threepio.
THREEPIO: (still shaken) I...I never knew I had it in me.
LUKE: Now let’s see if you can get the Ewoks on our side. 
THREEPIO: But I’m not really programmed for propaganda or political agitation, sir. 
LUKE: We just need you to do what you do best, Threepio…tell the story. 

WIPE TO: 

EXT. FOREST WALKWAY – NIGHT

The sounds of a council can be heard. 

EXT. CHIEF’S HUT

Younger Ewoks cram the doorway. 

INT. CHIEF'S HUT - COUNCIL OF ELDERS 

A glowing fire dances in the center of the spartan, low-ceilinged room, creating a kaleidoscope of shadows on the walls. Along one side, a group of ten Ewok elders flank Chief Chirpa, who sits on his throne. The Rebels sit along the walls of the hut, with Threepio between the two groups and Wicket and Teebo off to one side.

Threepio is in the midst of a long, animated speech in the Ewok's squeaky native tongue. The Ewoks listen carefully and occasionally murmur comments to each other. Threepio points several times at the Rebel group and pantomimes a short history of the Galactic Civil War. 

THREEPIO: Ku channa ma flu-atta. Ku channa ma flu-atta. Aranda bo toe toe tafni coroway manna coo-too, tim nee ah wunday ooss, faraway mana quitoo, Princess Leia wasi weba Artoo, vu tata rundi Darth Vader. <My friends, you must be wondering what all the trouble is about. Well, a long time ago on a planet far, far away, Princess Leia helped me and Artoo escape from a dreadful person called Darth Vader.> 

He imitates Vader’s raspy electronic breath for the Ewoks. 

THREEPIO: Un chenko vass qeemo keenan tundi Death Star. <Vader had created a terrible weapon, the Death Star.>

He imitates the roar of a TIE Fighter, and then a modest explosion. The Ewoks are unimpressed. 

THREEPIO: Er, let me rephrase that. Un chenko vass qeemo gogh miyami Death Star. <He had created a great planet-exploding weapon, the Death Star.>

This time the explosion is so loud it makes the Ewoks jump.

THREEPIO: Lin chenko vas skeemo. Me-chee un Jedi, Obi-Wan Kenobi. <Fortunately, we did meet another man, a Jedi named Obi-Wan Kenobi.>  (pauses, in Ben’s voice) May the Force be with you. 

The Ewoks are impressed by Threepio’s flawless voice imitation. The droid continues to speak. 

THREEPIO: Ee manna ma-chu Vader con yum-num. <And he fought Darth Vader with a laser sword.> 

Threepio imitates the hum and crackling noises of two lightsabers clashing. 

THREEPIO: A toy yum nah. A toy yum no. Obi-Wan me oit tu gaa tay! Oos, a tum da Death Star, hoat taa gu! <The swords flashed and burned, but suddenly Obi-Wan disappeared! And then, they sent the Death Star to destroy a planet.> (in Han’s voice) I’ve got a bad feeling about this…

The Ewoks murmur amongst themselves. 

THREEPIO: N’tse Master Luke a mitchay mitchu… <But Master Luke, very clever, got in his X-Wing fighter and flew right up to this Death Star…>

He imitates X-Wing fighter sounds. 

THREEPIO: Chimminay choo doo, BOOM!! You way day solja. <…and then he fired, boom! And the whole thing exploded.>

The Ewoks jump at the sound of the loud explosion. Artoo begins beeping excitedly at Threepio.

THREEPIO: Yes, Artoo. I was just coming to that. Coroway manna coo-too…toront too gosh, toront too gosh. <Then, there was a terrible invention, the walkers, and they walked in the snow, and attacked us.>

Threepio fills the hut with the sounds of the AT-AT walkers. 

THREEPIO: Master Luke tearaway hootu oos-stu-ah-a chimminay choo doo, choo doo. BOOM!! You way day solja. <But Master Luke got in his snowspeeder and exploded them all.>

Snowspeeder and explosion sounds come from Threepio’s metallic mouth. The Ewoks jump again, gasping. 

THREEPIO: Un tuta tull uta Millenium Falcon, a chimminay Cloud City. <Oh my, and then we all got in the Millenium Falcon and flew to Cloud City.>

He does the sound of the Falcon flying by. 

THREEPIO: Ee tah maruirsa, maruirsa, oss, va…ahh, oh my, bee choo do can choo do! Ah!! <And it was so beautiful there, very serene, but stormtroopers…oh my, don’t shoot, ah!!>

Threepio imitates the stormtroopers shooting him to pieces. The Ewoks gasp in horror. 

THREEPIO: A tull, a aty, ma toto. Ooss, nooch, Vader!! <I was shot and everything fell off. My hands, my legs, and my head. And the others were caught by Vader!>

Again, Vader’s breathing. The smaller Ewoks shiver with fright. 

THREEPIO: Tall tay bay Han Solo. Tee ka low carbon. Ba may. <But things were worse for Han Solo. He was frozen in carbon, and we thought he was dead.> 

Wicket hugs Han’s leg protectively. Leia is entranced at the verbal spell Threepio is weaving over the Ewoks. 

THREEPIO: Aa-oona. Un dekochna gooboo Sarlacc, oh! <But he wasn’t. We saved him from the terrible Sarlacc, oh!> 

He does some more lightsaber sounds. 

THREEPIO: Peech kama ee eekwi Death Star. Oss, va pa-manna luta. Baa moit na hay goo-ip too cah. Vade soy oto gubu. Nu wunday, nee a wundy, nee a gro-libu. <Now we must blow up another Death Star. And that is how we got to be here. We’ve come to seek your aid in fighting these enemies. Please help us.>

Threepio thanks his audience for listening in a long Ewokese sentence. At the end of it, the Chief, Logray, and the elders confer, then nod in agreement. The Chief stands and makes a pronouncement.

THREEPIO: (disappointed) Chief Chirpa says it’s a very moving account. But he doesn’t see what it all has to do with the Ewoks. 

A deep silence fills the chamber. The heroes look at each other with worry. Finally, Han stands up and faces the Ewoks. 

HAN: Tell them this, Goldenrod…

Han continues to speak, as Threepio translates it for the tribe. 

HAN: They shouldn’t help us because we’re asking them to. They shouldn’t even help us because it’s in their best interests to do so – even though it is, you know. That’s why I used to do stuff, because it was in my interest. But not anymore. Mostly I do things for my friends now. Because what else is so important? Money? Power? Jabba had that, and you know what happened to him. The point is, your friends are…(suddenly at a loss for inspiration) your friends. You know? 

Leia’s eyes fill with tears at Han’s plea. The Ewoks remain silent, impassive. Han sits down, and Luke stands up. 

LUKE: (with Threepio translating) I realize this concept may be hard for you to understand…but it’s terribly important for the entire galaxy for our Rebel force to destroy the Imperial presence here on Endor. Look up, there, through the smoke hole in the roof. Just through that hole, you can count a hundred stars. In the whole sky there are millions. And billions you can’t even see. And they all have planets…and moons…and people just like you. And the Empire is destroying all of that. You can…you could get dizzy just lying on your back and staring up at all the starshine. You could almost explode, it’s so beautiful sometimes. And you’re part of that beauty. It’s all part of the same Force. And the Empire is trying to turn out the lights. 

There is extensive squawking amongst the Ewoks; however, they don’t seem quite convinced. Leia gets to her feet. 

LEIA: Do it for the trees. 

The Ewoks glance at each other, stunned by that simple phrase. Suddenly Wicket leaps to his feet. He turns and faces the council, giving an impassioned speech. 

THREEPIO: (translating) Honorable Elders, this golden god, whose return to us was foretold since the First Tree, tells us now that he will not be our master – that we must choose our own destiny. We are free. Yet how must we comport ourselves? Is an Ewok’s love of the wood any less because he can leave it? No – his love is more, because he can leave it, yet he stays. His friends tell us of a Force, a great living spirit, of which we are all a part. We know this spirit, though we call it not the Force. The friends of the Golden One tell us this Force is in great jeopardy, here and everywhere. When the fire reaches the forest, who is safe? Not even the Great Tree of which all things are part; nor its’ leaves, nor its roots, nor its birds. All are in peril, forever and ever. It is a brave thing to confront such a fire. Many will die, so that the forest lives on. But the Ewoks are brave. 

The Elders are visibly moved by this. They finally nod in agreement. Chief Chirpa stands and gives another pronouncement. The drums begin to sound, and all the Ewoks stand with a great cheer and screeches.

HAN: What's going on?
LEIA: I don't know.

Luke has been sharing the joy with smiling visage, but now something passes like a dark cloud through his consciousness. The others do not notice.

THREEPIO: Wonderful! We are now a part of the tribe.

Several of the little teddy bears run up and hug the Rebels.

HAN: Just what I always wanted.
THREEPIO: The Chief has vowed to help us in any way to rid their land of the evil ones. 

Chewbacca is being enthusiastically embraced by an Ewok, while Wicket clings to Han's leg.

HAN: (chuckles) Well, short help is better than no help at all, Chewie. (to Wicket) Thank you. Okay.
THREEPIO: He says the scouts are going to show us the quickest way to the shield generator.

Chewie barks. Luke has drifted to the back of the hut. Now he wanders outside into the moonlight. Leia notices and follows.

HAN: Good. How far is it? Ask him. We need some fresh supplies, too. And try and get our weapons back.

Han pulls Threepio back as he keeps trying to translate.

HAN: (cont) And hurry up, will ya? I haven't got all day.
THREEPIO: Why? Are there other droids you need to drive to distraction before retiring? 

EXT. EWOK VILLAGE - NIGHT

The walkway is deserted now. The windows of the little huts glow and flicker from the fires inside. The sounds of the forest fill the soft night air. Luke has wandered away from the Chief's hut and stands staring up at the Death Star. Leia finds him like that.

LEIA: Luke, what's wrong?
LUKE: Everything, I’m afraid. Or maybe nothing. Maybe things are finally going to be the way they were meant to be. 

Luke turns and looks at her a long moment.

LUKE: Leia... do you remember your mother? Your real mother?
LEIA: Just a little bit. She died when I was very young.
LUKE: What do you remember?
LEIA: Just...images, really. Feelings.
LUKE: Tell me.
LEIA: (a little surprised at his insistence) She was very beautiful. Kind, but...sad.  (looks up) Why are you asking me all this?

He looks away, in anguish.

LUKE: I have no memory of my mother. I never knew her.
LEIA: Luke, tell me. What's troubling you?
LUKE: Vader is here...now, on this moon.
LEIA: (alarmed) How do you know?
LUKE: I felt his presence. He's come for me. 
LEIA: But how could he know we were here? Was it the code, did we leave out some password? 
LUKE: No, it’s me. He can feel when I'm near. That's why I have to go.  (facing her) As long as I stay, I'm endangering the group and our mission here.  (beat) I have to face him.

Leia is distraught, confused.

LEIA: I don’t understand. Why?

Luke moves close and his manner is gentle. And very calm.

LUKE: He's my father.

Leia recoils, sickened. 

LEIA: Your father?
LUKE: There's more. It won't be easy for you to hear it, but you must. You have to know before I leave because I might not make it. If I don't make it back, you're the only hope for the Alliance.

Leia is very disturbed by this. She moves away, as if to deny it.

LEIA: Luke, don't talk that way. You have to survive. I do what I can – we all do – but I’m not important. You are. You have a power I--I don't understand and could never have.
LUKE: You're wrong, Leia. You have that power too. In time you'll learn to use it as I have. 
LEIA: Luke…what’s come over you?!?
LUKE: The Force is strong in my family. My father has it...I have it...and...my sister has it.

Leia stares into his eyes. What she sees there frightens her. But she doesn't draw away. She begins to understand.

LUKE: Yes. It's you, Leia.

Leia is dazed…but somehow, calm. And a little bit surprised at herself. 

LEIA: I know. Somehow...I've always known.
LUKE: Then you know why I have to face him.
LEIA: No! Luke, run away, far away. If he can feel your presence, then leave this place. I wish I could go with you.
LUKE: No, you don't. You’ve never faltered, Leia. When Han and I and the others doubted, you've always been strong. You’ve never turned away from your responsibilities. I can’t say the same. 

He looks down, at his glove-covered mechanical hand. 

LUKE: Well…now we’re both going to fulfill our destinies. 
LEIA: But why must you confront him?
LUKE: Because...there is good in him. I've felt it. He won't turn me over to the Emperor. I can save him. I can turn him back to the good side. I have to try. He’s our father. 

They hold each other close and look at each other, brother and sister.

LUKE: Goodbye, dear sister. Goodbye, sweet, sweet Leia…

Leia holds back her tears as Luke slowly lets her go and moves away. He disappears onto the walkway that leads out of the village. Leia, bathed in moonlight, watches him go as Han comes out of the Chief's hut and comes over to her.

Leia is crying, her body trembling. He realizes only now that she is crying.

HAN: Hey, what's goin' on?

Leia attempts to stifle her sobs and wipes her eyes.

LEIA: Nothing. I - just want to be alone for a little while.
HAN: (angry) Nothing?  Come on, tell me.  What's goin' on?

She looks up at him, struggling to control herself.

LEIA: I...I can't tell you.
HAN: You can’t tell me?!? I thought we were closer than this! (loses his temper) Did you tell Luke? Is that who you could tell?
LEIA: I...
HAN: Ahhh...

He starts to walk away, exasperated, then stops and walks back to her.

HAN: I'm sorry.
LEIA: Hold me.

Han gathers her tightly in his protective embrace.

EXT .FOREST - IMPERIAL LANDING PLATFORM

An Imperial shuttle floats down from the Death Star and lands gracefully on the huge platform.

Now, an Imperial walker approaches the platform from the darkness of the forest. The whole outpost - platform, walkers, military - looks particularly offensive in the midst of this verdant beauty.

EXT. IMPERIAL LANDING PLATFORM - LOWER DECK

Darth Vader walks down the ramp of the shuttle onto the platform, into an elevator, and appears on a ramp on a lower level. He walks toward another ramp exit and is met by two troopers and a commander with Luke, in binders, at their center. The young Jedi gazes at Vader with complete calm.

COMMANDER: This is a Rebel that surrendered to us. Although he denies it, I believe there may be more of them, and I request permission to conduct a further search of the area.

The commander extends his hand, revealing Luke's lightsaber.

COMMANDER: He was armed only with this.

Vader looks at Luke, turns away and faces the commander, taking the lightsaber from the commander's hand.

VADER: Good work, Commander. Leave us. Conduct your search and bring his companions to me.
COMMANDER: Yes, my Lord.

The officer and troops withdraw. Vader and Luke are left standing alone in the oddly tranquil beauty of the place. The sounds of the forest filter in upon them.

VADER: So. You have come to me. 
LUKE: And you to me. 
VADER: The Emperor has been expecting you. He believes you will turn to the dark side. 
LUKE: I know, father.
VADER: So, you have accepted the truth.
LUKE: I've accepted the truth that you were once Anakin Skywalker, my father.
VADER: (turning to face him) That name no longer has any meaning for me.
LUKE: It is the name of your true self. You've only forgotten. I know there is good in you. The Emperor hasn't driven it from you fully. That is why you couldn't destroy me. That's why you won't bring me to your Emperor now.

Vader looks down from Luke to the lightsaber in his own black-gloved hand. He seems to ponder Luke's words.

VADER: (indicating lightsaber) I see you have constructed a new lightsaber.

Vader ignites the lightsaber and holds it to examine its humming, brilliant emerald blade.

VADER: Your skills are complete. Indeed, you are powerful, as the Emperor has foreseen.

They stand for a moment, then Vader extinguishes the lightsaber.

LUKE: Come with me.
VADER: Someone has filled your mind with foolish ideas, young one. Obi-Wan once thought as you do.
LUKE: Don’t blame Ben for your fall. 

Luke steps close to Vader, then stops. Vader is still.

VADER: You don't know the power of the dark side. I must obey my master.
LUKE: I will not turn...and you'll be forced to kill me.
VADER: If that is your destiny…
LUKE: (pleading) Search your feelings, father! You can't do this! I feel the conflict within you. Let go of your hate.

Vader stares at him for a long moment. For the first time, a trace of regret enters his voice. 

VADER: It is too late for me, son. 

Vader signals to some distant stormtroopers. They walk up and grab Luke’s arms. 

VADER: The Emperor will show you the true nature of the Force. He is your master now.

He and Luke stand staring at one another for a long moment.

LUKE: Then my father is truly dead.

Luke is taken away. Vader stares out at the night sky of Endor, silent and gripping Luke’s lightsaber like it were his own. 

EXT. ENDOR - RIDGE OVERLOOKING SHIELD GENERATOR - MORNING 

Han, Leia, Chewbacca, the droids, Wicket, and another Ewok scout, PAPLOO, hide on a ridge overlooking the massive Imperial shield generator. At the base of the generator is an Imperial landing platform. As they watch, the shuttle carrying Luke and Vader takes off and flies toward the Death Star. Leia studies the installation.

LEIA: The main entrance to the control bunker's on the far side of that landing platform. This isn't gonna be easy.
HAN: Hey, don't worry. Chewie and me got into a lot of places more heavily guarded than this.

Wicket and Paploo are chattering away in Ewok language. They speak to Threepio.

LEIA: What's he saying?
THREEPIO: He says there's a secret entrance on the other side of the ridge.

EXT. SPACE - REBEL FLEET

The vast fleet hangs in space near a blue planet. A giant Rebel Star Cruiser is up at the front, but now the Millennium Falcon roars up to a spot ahead of it, tiny in comparison.

INT. MILLENNIUM FALCON - COCKPIT

Lando is in the pilot seat. His alien copilot, NIEN NUNB, takes some getting used to in the familiar environs of the Falcon's cockpit. Lando speaks into his comlink.

LANDO: Admiral, we're in position. All fighters accounted for.

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER -- BRIDGE

ACKBAR: Proceed with the countdown. All groups assume attack coordinates.

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

Lando turns to his weird copilot.

LANDO: Don't worry, my friends are down there. They'll have that shield down on time...(to himself) or this'll be the shortest offensive of all time.

The copilot flips some switches and grunts an alien comment.

ACKBAR: (VO) All craft, prepare to jump to hyperspace on my mark.
LANDO: All right. Stand by.

He pulls a lever, and the stars outside begin to streak.

EXT. SPACE - REBEL FLEET

We are treated to an awesome sight: first the Millennium Falcon, then Ackbar's Star Cruiser, then, in large segments, the huge fleet ROARS INTO HYPERSPACE. 

INT. ACKBAR’S STAR CRUISER – BRIDGE

The stars streak by Ackbar on his bridge. 

EXT. SPACE – REBEL FLEET

The remainder of the Rebel fleet roars into hyperspace. And disappears. 

EXT. ENDOR - RIDGE OVERLOOKING CONTROL BUNKER

Han, Leia, Chewie, the droids, and their two Ewok guides, Wicket and Paploo, have reunited with the Rebel strike squad. The entire group is spread through the thick undergrowth. Below them is the BUNKER that leads into the generator. Four Imperial scouts, their speeder bikes parked nearby, keep watch over the bunker entrance. Chewie growls an observation, and Paploo chatters away to Han in Ewok language.

HAN: Back door, huh? Good idea.

Wicket and Paploo continue their Ewok conversation.

HAN: (con’t) It's only a few guards. This shouldn't be too much trouble.
LEIA: Well, it only takes one to sound the alarm.
HAN: (with self-confident grin) Then we'll do it real quiet-like.
LEIA: Weren’t you saying something like that only yesterday? 
HAN: (ignores the jibe) If Luke can just keep Vader off our backs like you said he would, this oughta be no sweat. Just gotta hit those guards fast and quiet…

Threepio explains what is going on to Wicket and Paploo. The Ewoks chatter a moment between themselves. Then Paploo jumps up and scampers into the underbrush.

LEIA: We’re running out of time. The fleet’s in hyperspace by now. 

Threepio asks Wicket where Paploo went and is given a short reply.

THREEPIO: Oh! Oh, my. Uh, Princess Leia!
LEIA: Quiet.
THREEPIO:  I'm afraid our furry companion has gone and done something rather rash.
LEIA: Oh, no.

EXT. BUNKER - ENTRANCE

Paploo has slipped out of the undergrowth near where the Imperial scouts are lounging. 

EXT. RIDGE

Han, Leia and company watch in distress. Chewie barks.

HAN: (sighs) There goes our surprise attack.

EXT. BUNKER

Paploo silently swings his furry ball of a body onto one of the scout's speeder bikes and begins flipping switches at random. Suddenly, the bike's engine fires up with a tremendous ROAR. Paploo grins and continues flipping switches. The scouts leap up in surprise. 

SCOUT: Look! Over there! Stop him!

The Imperial scouts race toward Paploo just as his speeder zooms into motion. Paploo hangs on by his paws and shoots away into the forest.

Three of the Imperial scouts jump on their rocket bikes and speed away in pursuit. The fourth watches them go from his post at the door.

EXT. RIDGE

Han, Leia, and Chewie exchange delighted looks.

HAN: Not bad for a little furball. There's only one left. You stay here. We'll take care of this.

Han and the Wookiee nod at each other and slip down toward the bunker. Threepio moves to stand next to Wicket and Artoo.

THREEPIO: I have decided that we shall stay here.

Artoo beeps an electronic raspberry at the idea of being kept out of the action. 

EXT. FOREST

Paploo sails through the trees, more lucky than in control. It's scary, but he loves it. When the Imperial scouts pull within sight behind him and begin firing laser bolts, he decides he's had enough. As he rounds a tree, out of their sight, Paploo grabs a vine and swings up into the trees. A moment later, the scouts tear under him in pursuit of the still-flying, unoccupied bike.

EXT. BUNKER

Han sneaks up behind the remaining Imperial scout, taps him on the shoulder and lets the scout chase him behind the bunker into the arms of the waiting Rebel strike team. 

EXT. BUNKER – SLIGHTLY LATER

The scout has been stripped of his uniform, and is carried off into the woods by two of the commandos. The other commandos form a perimeter around the door of the bunker. 

Han returns to the front, and taps out a pattern on the bunker door's control panel. Everyone stands out of sight, police-style, as the door opens. Han and Leia peek inside. No sign of life. 

INT. BUNKER

The group enters the bunker silently, leaving one lookout (dressed in the Imperial scout’s uniform) behind.

EXT. SPACE – DEATH STAR

The half-completed Death Star hangs in space over the Moon of Endor. 

INT. DEATH STAR - EMPEROR'S THRONE ROOM

The elevator opens. Vader and Luke enter the room alone. They walk across the dark space to stand before the throne, father and son side by side beneath the gaze of the Emperor. Vader bows to his Master. The Emperor motions him to rise. 

VADER: I have brought our new slave as you commanded. 
LUKE: Your prisoner. But not your slave. 
EMPEROR: Welcome, young Skywalker. I have been expecting you.

Luke peers at the hooded figure defiantly. The Emperor then looks down at Luke's binders.

EMPEROR: You no longer need those.

The Emperor motions ever so slightly with his finger and Luke's binders fall away, clattering to the floor. Luke looks down at his own hands, free now to reach out and grab the Emperor's neck. He does nothing.

EMPEROR: Guards, leave us.

The red-cloaked guards turn and disappear behind the elevator. 

EMPEROR: (to Luke) Tell me, young Skywalker. Who has trained you in the ways of the Jedi? 

Luke says nothing. The Emperor rubs his fingers together, as if trying to remember. 

EMPEROR: Oh, I know it was Obi-Wan Kenobi at first. Of course, we are familiar with the skill Obi-Wan had in training Jedi. 

He motions toward Vader. Luke tenses with fury, but brings his anger under control when he sees how much it is pleasing the old dictator. 

EMPEROR: But alas, Obi-Wan is now dead; his elder student saw to that. So tell me – who continued your training? 

Luke remains silent. 

EMPEROR: There was one called…Yoda. An aged Master Jedi….ah. Yoda, then. 

Luke tenses again, this time with self-anger and self-doubt. 

EMPEROR: This Yoda. Lives he still? 

Luke focuses his sight on the windows beyond the Emperor, trying to quiet his mind. 

EMPEROR: Ah – he lives not. Very good, Skywalker, you almost hid that from me. But you could not, and you cannot. Your deepest flickerings are to me apparent. That is my first lesson to you. 

Luke sags, discouraged. 

EMPEROR: I’m sure Yoda taught you how to use the Force with great skill. 

The taunt has its desired effect – Luke visibly flushes with anger. The Emperor actually licks his lips and laughs at this. Luke suddenly sees something behind the laugh – fear. Naked fear. He stands tall and gazes at the Emperor with sudden absolute calm. 

EMPEROR: I'm looking forward to completing your training. In time you will call me Master.
LUKE:  You're gravely mistaken. You won't convert me as you did my father.

The Emperor gets down from his throne and walks up very close to Luke. The Emperor looks into his eyes and, for the first time, Luke can perceive the evil visage within the hood.

EMPEROR: Oh no, my young Jedi. You will find that it is you who are mistaken...about a great many things.
VADER: His lightsaber.

Vader extends a gloved hand toward the Emperor, revealing Luke's lightsaber. The Emperor takes it.

EMPEROR: Ah, yes, a Jedi's weapon. Much like your father's. By now you must know your father can never be turned from the dark side. So will it be with you.
LUKE: You're wrong. Soon I'll be dead...and you with me.

The Emperor laughs.

EMPEROR: Perhaps you refer to the imminent attack of your Rebel fleet.

Luke looks up sharply.

EMPEROR: Yes...I assure you we are quite safe from your friends here.
LUKE: Your overconfidence is your weakness.

Vader looks at Luke.

EMPEROR: Your faith in your friends is yours.
VADER: It is pointless to resist, my son.

The Emperor turns to face Luke.

EMPEROR: (angry) Everything that has transpired has done so according to my design. (indicates Endor) Your friends up there on the Sanctuary Moon...

Luke reacts. The Emperor notes it.

EMPEROR: (con’t) ...are walking into a trap. As is your Rebel fleet. It was I who allowed the Alliance to know the location of the shield generator. It is quite safe from your pitiful little band. An entire legion of my best troops awaits them.

Luke's look darts from the Emperor to Vader and, finally, to the sword in the Emperor's hand.

EMPEROR: Oh...I'm afraid the deflector shield will be quite operational when your friends arrive. And that is just the beginning of my surprise – but, of course, I don’t wish to spoil it for you. 

INT. BUNKER - MAIN CONTROL ROOM

Han, Leia, Chewie, and the Rebel strike team storm through a door and enter the main control room, taking all of the personnel prisoner.

HAN: All right! Up! Move! Come on! Quickly! Quickly, Chewie.

The Rebel troops herd the generator controllers away from their panels. Leia glances at one of the screens on the control panel.

LEIA: Han! Hurry! The fleet will be here any moment.
HAN: Charges!  Come on, come on!

EXT. BUNKER

Outside, Threepio watches nervously in the bushes as several more controllers and stormtroopers run into the bunker, leaving guards at the door.

THREEPIO: (to Wicket) Oh, my! They'll be captured! And the Rebel Fleet is already on the way – oh, this is a catastrophe! 

Wicket chatters in Ewok language, and then takes off full steam into the forest.

THREEPIO: Wa-wait! Wait, come back! You can’t abandon us!! Artoo, stay with me.
 
INT. BUNKER

Inside the bunker, Han looks up from setting charges as an Imperial commander enters.

COMMANDER: Freeze! 

In a flash of anger, Han hurtles a bag of charges at the commander. He is knocked backwards over a rail, plummeting with a scream to his death.  Han and Leia spin, to find dozens of Imperial weapons trained on them and their cohorts. Another commander levels a blaster at them. 

COMMANDER: You Rebel scum. 

A poised force of Imperial troops surround them. Even more pour into the room, roughly disarming the Rebel contingent. Han, Leia, and Chewie exchange looks. They're helpless.

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

Lando operates the controls to come out of hyperspace. 

EXT. SPACE - ENDOR, DEATH STAR, REBEL FLEET

The Death Star and its Sanctuary Moon hang distant in space as the Rebel fleet comes out of hyperspace with an awesome roar. The Millennium Falcon and several Rebel fighters are at the front as the space armada bears down on its target.

INT. MILLENNIUM FALCON - COCKPIT

Lando flips switches, checks his screen, and speaks into the radio.

LANDO: All wings report in.

INT. WEDGE’S X-WING FIGHTER -- COCKPIT

WEDGE: Red Leader standing by.

INT. GRAY LEADER’S A-WING FIGHTER – COCKPIT

GRAY LEADER: Gray Leader standing by.

INT. GREEN LEADER’S B-WING FIGHTER -- COCKPIT

GREEN LEADER: Green Leader standing by.

INT. WEDGE’S X-WING FIGHTER – COCKPIT

WEDGE: Lock S-foils in attack positions.

EXT. SPACE – REBEL FLEET

The X-Wings’ wings split into battle configuration. The Rebel fleet converges on the Death Star. 

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER - BRIDGE

From the bridge of the Rebel Headquarters Frigate, Admiral Ackbar watches the fighters massing outside his viewscreen.

ACKBAR: May the Force be with us.

INT. MILLENNIUM FALCON - COCKPIT

Lando looks worriedly at his alien copilot, Nien Nunb, who points to the control panel and talks to Lando.

NIEN: Ah-the-yairee u-hareh mu-ah-hareh. 
LANDO: How could that be?!? We've got to be able to get some kind of a reading on that shield, up or down. 
NIEN: Mu-ah-hareh mu-kay, huh? 
LANDO: Jammed? Well, how could they be jamming us if they don't know… if we're coming…

Lando shoots a concerned look out at the approaching Death Star as the implications of what he's just said sink in. He hits a switch on his comlink.

LANDO: Break off the attack! The shield is still up!!!

INT. WEDGE’S X-WING FIGHTER -- COCKPIT

WEDGE: I get no reading. Are you sure?

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON -- COCKPIT

LANDO: Pull up!!! All craft pull up!!!

The Falcon turns hard to the left. Out the window the stars and the Death Star move off right.

EXT. SPACE - DEATH STAR SHIELD

The Falcon and the fighters of Red Squad veer off desperately to avoid the unseen wall. Three X-Wings ram the invisible shield, exploding in flames along the shield’s surface. 

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER - BRIDGE

Alarms are screaming and lights flashing as the huge ship changes course abruptly. Other ships in the fleet shoot by outside as the armada tries to halt its forward momentum.

ACKBAR: Take evasive action! Green Group, stick close to holding sector MV-7.

EXT. SPACE – DEATH STAR SHIELD

The large Rebel vessels slowly veer away from the Death Star. 

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER -- BRIDGE

A Mon Calamari controller turns away from his screen and calls out to Ackbar, quite excited. The Admiral rushes over to the controller.

CONTROLLER: Admiral, we have enemy ships in sector 47.

On the screen can be seen the moon, Death Star, and the massive Imperial fleet. Ackbar moves to the comlink. 

ACKBAR: IT’S A TRAP!!!

EXT. SPACE – REBEL FLEET

The Millenium Falcon flies into the Imperial trap. 

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON -- COCKPIT

LANDO: (over comlink) Fighters coming in.

The Millennium Falcon and several squads of Rebel fighters head into an armada of TIE fighters. The sky explodes as a fierce dogfight ensues in and around the giant Rebel cruisers.

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER – BRIDGE

There is much excitement on the bridge as the attack begins.

CONTROLLER: We’ve added power to the forward shields, Admiral. 
ACKBAR: Double power on the main battery! 

The Star Cruiser is rocked by explosions from outside. 

OFFICER: Gold Wing’s being hit hard!!
ACKBAR: Give them cover! We must have time!! (into comlink) All ships, stand position. Wait for my command to return! 

INT. REBEL COCKPIT

REBEL PILOT: There's too many of them!

EXT. SPACE

The Millenium Falcon flies through the dogfight. 

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON -- COCKPIT

LANDO: Accelerate to attack speed! Draw their fire away from the cruisers.

INT. WEDGE’S X-WING FIGHTER -- COCKPIT

WEDGE: Copy, Gold Leader.

EXT. SPACE – REBEL CRUISERS

The battle continues around the giant cruisers.

INT. DEATH STAR - EMPEROR'S THRONE ROOM

Through the round window behind the Emperor's throne can be seen the distant flashes of the space battle in progress.

EMPEROR: Come, boy. See for yourself.

The Emperor is sitting in his throne, with Vader standing at his side. Luke moves to look through a small section of the window.

EMPEROR: From here you will witness the final destruction of the Alliance, and the end of your insignificant Rebellion.
LUKE: (whisper) It can’t end like this…

Luke is in torment. He glances at his lightsaber sitting on the armrest of the throne. The Emperor watches him and smiles, touches the lightsaber.

EMPEROR: You want this, don't you? The hate is swelling in you now. Take your Jedi weapon. Use it. I am unarmed. Strike me down with it. Give in to your anger. With each passing moment, you make yourself more my servant.

Vader watches Luke in his agony.

LUKE: No!
EMPEROR: It is unavoidable. It is your destiny. You, like your father, are now… mine.

EXT. FOREST - GENERATOR BUNKER

Han, Leia, Chewie, and the rest of the strike team are led out of the bunker by their captors. The surrounding area, deserted before, is now crowded with two-legged Imperial walkers and hundreds of Imperial troops. The situation looks hopeless.

STORMTROOPER: All right, move it! I said move it! Go on!

From the undergrowth beyond the clearing comes a wild series of beeps and whistles. And --

THREEPIO: Hello! I say, over there! Were you looking for me?
BUNKER COMMANDER: Where did those droids come from? Bring those two down here!
STORMTROOPER: Let's go!

Artoo and Threepio are standing near one of the big trees. As six Imperial stormtroopers rush over to take them captive, the two droids duck out of sight behind the tree.

THREEPIO: Well, they're on their way. Artoo, are you sure this was a good idea?
STORMTROOPER: Freeze! Don't move!
THREEPIO: We surrender.

The stormtroopers come around the tree and find the two droids waiting quietly to be taken. As the Imperial troops move to do that, however, a band of Ewoks drops down from above and overpowers them.

THREEPIO: Ohhh! Stand back, Artoo!!

In a nearby tree, an Ewok raises a horn to his lips and sounds the EWOK ATTACK CALL. All hell breaks loose as hundreds of Ewoks throw their fuzzy bodies into the fray against the assembled stormtroopers and their awesome two-legged walkers.

BUNKER COMMANDER: You men there – form a firing line!
STORMTROOPER: We can’t, sir! Our own men are in the line of fire!! 

Stormtroopers fire on Ewoks with sophisticated weapons while their furry little adversaries sneak up behind the Imperial troopers and bash them over the head with large clubs. 

Biker scouts dart about blasting Ewoks, only to be crushed by a volley of rocks tossed by Ewoks from the trees above.

Ewoks in handmade, primitive hang gliders drop rocks onto the stormtroopers, dive-bombing their deadly adversaries. One is hit in the wing with laser fire and crashes. 

A line of Ewoks hangs desperately to a vine that is hooked to a walker’s foot. As the walker moves along, the fuzzy creatures are dragged behind. 

In the confusion of the battle, Han and Leia break away and dive for the cover of the bunker door as explosions erupt around them. Han goes to the bunker door control panel.

LEIA: The code's changed. We need Artoo!
HAN: Here's the terminal.

LEIA: (into comlink) Artoo, where are you? We need you at the bunker right away.

Artoo and Threepio are hiding behind a log as the battle rages around them. Suddenly the stubby little astrodroid lets out a series of whistles and shoots off across the battlefield. Threepio, panicked, runs after him.

THREEPIO: Going? What do you mean, you're going? But--but going where, Artoo? No, what! Artoo! Oh, this is no time for heroics. Come back!

Biker scouts race around and over the two droids, blasting away at the little Ewoks as the furries scurry for cover.

A group of Ewoks have moved a primitive catapult into position. They fire off a large boulder that hits one of the walkers. The walker turns and heads for the catapult, blasting away with both guns. The Ewoks abandon their weapons and flee in all directions. Just as the walker moves in to stomp the catapult, Ewoks drop vines restraining two huge logs that swing down and smash the walker's head flat.

EXT. SPACE

The Falcon and other Rebel fighters are engaged in a ferocious combat with Imperial TIE fighters, the battle raging around the cruisers of the Rebel armada.

INT MILLENNIUM FALCON - COCKPIT

Lando is in radio communication with the pilots of the other Rebel squads.

LANDO: Watch yourself, Wedge! Three from above!

INT. WEDGE’S X-WING FIGHTER -- COCKPIT

WEDGE: Red Three, Red Two, pull in!

INT. RED TWO’S COCKPIT

RED TWO: Got it!

EXT. SPACE

The dogfight between Rebel X-Wings and Imperial TIE fighters rages. 

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER – BRIDGE

General Madine has manned a gun turret and opened fire on the Imperial fighters himself. 

MADINE: May the Force be with us!!!

INT. RED THREE’S COCKPIT

RED THREE: Three of them coming in, twenty degrees!

INT. WEDGE’S X-WING FIGHTER -- COCKPIT

WEDGE: Cut to the left! I'll take the leader! 

EXT. SPACE

Wedge shoots down the TIE fighter. 

INT. WEDGE’S X-WING FIGHTER -- COCKPIT

WEDGE: They're heading for the medical frigate.

EXT. SPACE

Lando steers the Falcon through a complete flip, as his crew fires at the TIEs from the belly guns.

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – GUN TURRET

A Rebel fighter shoots at TIE fighters in one of the Falcon’s gun turrets. He scores two direct hits. He nicks a third TIE, which plows into one of its’ own wingmen. 

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON -- COCKPIT

NAVIGATOR: Pressure's steady.
NIEN: (to Lando) Lamou-be-o-tee. 

Lando looks out the window at what Nien has noticed. 

LANDO’S POV: The giant Imperial Star Destroyers wait silently some distance from the battle. The Emperor’s huge Super Star Destroyer rests in the middle of the fleet. 

LANDO: You’re right. Only the fighters are attacking.  I wonder what those Star Destroyers are waiting for…?

INT. SUPER STAR DESTROYER - BRIDGE

Admiral Piett and two fleet commanders watch the battle at the huge window of the Super Star Destroyer bridge.

COMMANDER: We're in attack position now, sir.
PIETT: Hold here.
COMMANDER: We're not going to attack?
PIETT: (smug) I have my orders from the Emperor himself. He has something special planned for them. We only need to keep them from escaping.

INT. EMPEROR'S TOWER - THRONE ROOM

The Emperor, Vader, and a horrified Luke watch the aerial battle fireworks out the window and on the viewscreens. Another Rebel ship explodes against the protective shield.

EMPEROR: As you can see, my young apprentice, your friends have failed. Now witness the firepower of this fully armed and operational battle station!! (into comlink) Fire at will, Commander!

Luke, in shock, looks out across the surface of the Death Star to the Rebel fleet beyond.

INT. DEATH STAR - CONTROL ROOM

Controllers pull back on several switches. Commander Jerjerrod stands over them.

JERJERROD: Fire!

INT. DEATH STAR - BLAST CHAMBER

A button is pressed, which switches on a panel of lights.

A hooded Imperial soldier reaches overhead and pulls a lever. A huge beam of light emanates from a long shaft. Two stormtroopers stand to one side at a control panel.

EXT. DEATH STAR 

The giant laser dish on the completed half of the Death Star begins to glow; Then a powerful beams shoots out toward the aerial battle.

EXT. SPACE - AIR BATTLE

The air is thick with giant ships. In among them, Rebel X-wings dogfight with Imperial TIE fighters. Now an enormous Rebel cruiser is hit by the Death Star beam and is blown to dust.

The Millennium Falcon roars over CAMERA, followed closely by several TIE fighters.

INT MILLENNIUM FALCON - COCKPIT

The ship is buffeted by the tremendous explosion of the Rebel cruiser. Lando and his copilot are stunned by the sight of the Death Star firepower.

NIEN: AAHHH!!!
LANDO: That blast came from the Death Star! That thing's operational!!! (into comlink) Home One, this is Gold Leader.

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER - BRIDGE

Ackbar stands amid the confusion on the wide bridge and speaks into the comlink.

ACKBAR: We saw it. All craft prepare to retreat.

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON -- COCKPIT

LANDO: You won't get another chance at this, Admiral.

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER – BRIDGE

ACKBAR: We have no choice, General Calrissian. Our cruisers can't repel firepower of that magnitude.

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON -- COCKPIT

LANDO: Han will have that shield down. We've got to give him more time. Head for those Star Destroyers. 

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER – BRIDGE

Ackbar recoils as a huge charge of flak rumbles the ship, painting the windows in light. Ackbar turns to his controller. 

ACKBAR: Move the fleet forward. 
CONTROLLER: Sir, we don’t stand much of a chance against those Star Destroyers. They outnumber us, and they’re move heavily armed. 
ACKBAR: I know. Concentrate your fire on their power generators. If we can knock out their shields, our fighters might have a chance against them. 

The ship is rocked by another explosion. 

CONTROLLER: Intensify auxiliary shields!!!

EXT. FOREST - GENERATOR BUNKER

Artoo and Threepio make it to the door, as Han and Leia provide cover fire.

THREEPIO: We're coming!
HAN: Come on! Come on!

The little droid moves to the terminal and plugs in his computer arm. 

THREEPIO: Oh, Artoo, hurry!

A stormtrooper suddenly pops up from a bush and fires a blaster bolt right into the little droid. With an electronic SCREAM, Artoo is knocked head over heels to the other end of the blast door, finally landing on his feet. Han shoots the stormtrooper down with a snarl. 

HAN: Lousy backshooter!!

The stubby astrodroid's head is spinning and smoldering. Suddenly there is a loud SPROOING and Han and Leia turn around to see Artoo with all his compartment doors open, and all of his appendages sticking out; water and smoke spurt out of the nozzles in his body. Han rushes to the terminal, as Threepio rushes to his wounded companion.

THREEPIO: My goodness! Artoo, why did you have to be so brave?
HAN: Well, I suppose I could hotwire this thing.
LEIA: I'll cover you.

A walker lumbers forward, shooting laser blasts at frantic Ewoks running in all directions.  Two Ewoks are struck down by laser blasts.  One tries to awaken his friend, then realizes that he is dead. With a cry of grief, he buries his head in the dead Ewok’s chest. 

EXT. SPACE - DEATH STAR

The Rebel fleet continues to be picked off, from one side by the Death Star's deadly beam, from the other by the rampaging Imperial Star Destroyers.

INT. MILLENNIUM FALCON - COCKPIT

Lando steers the Falcon wildly through an obstacle course of floating giants. He's been yelling into the comlink.

LANDO: (desperately) Yes! I said closer! Move as close as you can and engage those Star Destroyers at point-blank range! That way the Death Star can’t hit us without knocking out its’ own ships!

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER – BRIDGE

ACKBAR: But no one’s ever gone nose-to-nose at that range between supervessels like their Destroyers and our Cruisers!

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

LANDO: Great! Then we’re inventing a new form of combat!

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER – BRIDGE

ACKBAR: We know nothing about the tactics of such a confrontation! 

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

LANDO: We know more than they do! And they’ll think we know more!!

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER – BRIDGE

ACKBAR: At that close range, we won't last long against those Star Destroyers.

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

LANDO: We'll last longer then we will against that Death Star!! And we might just take a few of them with us!!

EXT. SPACE

The Rebel cruisers move very close to the Imperial Star Destroyers and begin to blast away at point-blank range. Tiny fighters race across the giant surfaces, against a backdrop of laser fire.

The control tower of a Star Destroyer is under attack.

INT. REBEL COCKPIT

REBEL PILOT: She's gonna blow!

INT. REBEL Y-WING -- COCKPIT

Y-WING PILOT:  I'm hit!

EXT. SPACE

The damaged Y-wing plummets toward the Star Destroyer and crashes into the control tower, exploding. The control tower explodes with it. 

INT. EMPEROR'S TOWER - THRONE ROOM

Out of the window and on the view screens, the Rebel fleet is being decimated in blinding explosions of light and debris. But in here there is no sound of battle. The Emperor turns to Luke.

EMPEROR: Your fleet is lost. And your friends on the Endor moon will not survive… 

The Emperor pushes a comlink button on the arm of his throne. 

JERJERROD: (on comlink) Yes, My Lord? 
EMPEROR: Commander. Should by some miracle the Rebels manage to destroy the shield generator, you will turn this battle station upon the Endor moon… and destroy it. 
JERJERROD: My Lord, we have several battalions stationed –
EMPEROR: (whisper) You. Will. Destroy It. 
JERJERROD: (hypnotized) I….will…destroy it…

The Emperor deactivates the comlink. Luke has gone white as a sheet. 

EMPEROR: There is no escape, my young apprentice. The Alliance will die...as will your friends.

Luke's eyes are full of rage. Vader watches him.

EMPEROR: Good…I can feel your anger. I am defenseless.  Take your weapon! Strike me down with all your hatred, and your journey towards the dark side will be complete.

Luke turns toward the window, struggling…and can finally resist no longer. He spins around, thrusting out his arm, and the lightsaber flies into his hand. He ignites it in an instant and swings at the Emperor’s head. Vader's lightsaber flashes into view, blocking Luke's blow before it can reach the Emperor. The two blades spark at contact. The Emperor laughs maniacally. 

EXT. FOREST 

The battle rages on.  With a Tarzan-like yell, Chewie swings on a vine to the roof of one of the walkers. Two Ewoks cling to him. They land with a thud on the top of the lurching machine, then hang on for dear life. One of the Ewoks peeks through the window.

WALKER PILOT #1: Look!
PILOT #2: Get him off of there!

The walker pilot opens the hatch to see what's going on. He is yanked out and tossed overboard before he can scream. The two Ewoks jump into the cockpit and knock the second pilot unconscious. The Ewoks are thrown violently as the mighty machine careens out of control. Outside, Chewie is almost knocked overboard; he sticks his head into the hatch with a series of angry barks. The Ewoks are too busy and excited to listen to the Wookiee's complaint. Chewie slips inside the walker.

Chewbacca's walker moves through the forest, firing laser blasts at unsuspecting stormtroopers, and destroying other Imperial walkers. The Ewoks shout and cheer as the giant machine helps turn the tide of the battle in their favor.

Two speeder bikes chase Ewoks through the underbrush. As the scouts round a tree, they are knocked off their bikes by a vine tied between two trees.

A walker marches through the undergrowth blasting Ewoks as it goes. An Ewok warrior gives the signal, and a pile of logs is cut loose. The logs tumble under the walker's feet, causing it to slip and slide until it finally topples over with a great crash.

A scout bike races past and is lassoed with a heavy vine. The other end of the vine is tied to a tree, and the bike swings around in ever-tightening circles until it runs out of rope and crashes into the trees with a huge explosion.

EXT. FOREST - GENERATOR BUNKER

Han works furiously at the control panel; wires spark as he attempts to hotwire the door. He motions to Leia, who is blasting away at some stormtroopers.

HAN: I think I got it. I got it!

The three wires spark as the connection is made. With a LOUD WHOOSH, a second blast door crashes down in front of the first.

Han frowns and turns back to the wires again. Leia is momentarily distracted by this, and a stormtrooper seizes the opportunity and opens fire. Leia cries out in pain and slams back into the wall as her shoulder takes a hit. 

THREEPIO: Oh, Princess Leia, are you all right?
HAN: Let's see…
LEIA: It's not bad...
STORMTROOPER: (OS) Freeze!

They freeze, looking up. Two stormtroopers are approaching them, weapons leveled at their heads. 

THREEPIO: Oh, dear.
STORMTROOPER: Don't move!

Leia holds her laser gun ready, behind Han, out of view of the two stormtroopers moving toward them. Han and Leia's eyes lock; the moment seems suspended in time.

HAN: I love you.

Another shared look between them, as she smiles up at Han.

LEIA: I know.
STORMTROOPER: Hands up! Stand up!

Han stands up slowly and turns, revealing the gun in Leia's hand. She disposes of the stormtroopers in a flash. 

HAN: Nice play, Leia. 
LEIA: Just a little Corellian Overdrive. 

As Han turns back toward Leia, he looks up to see a giant walker approach and stand before him, its deadly weapons aimed right at him. Han puts himself between the walker and Leia.

HAN: (to Leia) Stay back…

The hatch on top of the walker opens and Chewie sticks his head out and barks triumphantly.

HAN: Chewie!  Get down here!  She's wounded!  No, wait....  (he grins at Leia) I got an idea.

INT. EMPEROR'S TOWER - THRONE ROOM

Luke and Vader are engaged in a man-to-man duel of lightsabers even more vicious then the battle on Bespin. But the young Jedi has grown stronger in the interim, and now the advantage shifts to him. 

LUKE: I won’t let you kill them. 
VADER: Yes. You will. 

Luke lunges at Vader, gritting his teeth as he strikes. Vader is forced back, losing his balance, and is knocked down the stairs. Luke stands at the top of the stairs, ready to attack.

EMPEROR: (laughing) Good.  Use your aggressive feelings, boy!  Let the hate flow through you.

Luke looks momentarily toward the Emperor, then back to Vader, and realizes he is using the dark side. He steps back, turns off his lightsaber, and relaxes, driving the hate from his being. Vader pulls himself back to his feet, humiliated and angry. 

VADER: Obi-Wan has taught you well.
LUKE: I will not fight you, father.

Vader walks back up the stairs to Luke.

VADER: You are unwise to lower your defenses!!!

Vader attacks, forcing Luke on the defensive. The young Jedi leaps in an amazing reverse flip up to the safety of the catwalk overhead. Vader stands below him.

EMPEROR: (laughing) Dodge and leap, foolish boy. There isn’t enough room in the galaxy to avoid your fate.  
LUKE: Your thoughts betray you, father. I feel the good in you...the conflict.
VADER: There is no conflict.
LUKE: You couldn't bring yourself to kill me before, and I don't believe you'll destroy me now.
VADER: Once again, you underestimate the power of the dark side. If you will not fight, then you will meet your destiny.
LUKE: You don’t mean that!!
VADER: I mean THIS!!!

Vader throws the laser sword and it cuts through the supports holding the catwalk, then returns to Vader's hand. With a yell, Luke tumbles to the ground in a shower of sparks and rolls out of sight under the Emperor's platform. Vader moves to find him.

EMPEROR: (laughs) Good.  Good...

Vader pauses at the edge of the overhang. Luke cannot be seen. 

VADER: You cannot hide forever, Luke. 
LUKE: (OS) You’ll have to come in after me. 
VADER: I will not give you the advantage that easily. 
LUKE: (OS) I wish no advantage. I will not fight you. 

Suddenly, Luke’s lightsaber rolls on the ground to Vader’s feet. Vader stares at it, then slowly takes it up. He gazes at it a moment longer. 

EMPEROR: After him…

With grave uncertainty, Vader clips Luke’s lightsaber to his belt and walks under the platform into the darkness. 

EXT. SPACE - AIR BATTLE

The two armadas, like their sea-bound ancestors, blast away at each other in individual point-blank confrontations. A Star Destroyer explodes. The Rebel victor limps away, its back half alive with a series of minor explosions. The Rebel cruiser manages to move in next to a second Star Destroyer before it explodes completely, taking the Imperial Star Destroyer with it. The Falcon and several fighters attack one of the larger Imperial ships.

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON -- COCKPIT

LANDO: Watch out. Squad at .06.

INT. REBEL COCKPIT

REBEL PILOT: I'm on it, Gold Leader.

INT. WEDGE’S X-WING FIGHTER -- COCKPIT

WEDGE: Good shot, Red Two.

EXT. SPACE

The battle rages on. 

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER – BRIDGE

ACKBAR: The jamming has stopped. We have a clear reading on the shield. 

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

LANDO: Is it still up? 

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER – BRIDGE

ACKBAR: I’m afraid so. It looks like General Solo’s unit didn’t make it. 

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON -- COCKPIT

Lando is visibly sweating. 

LANDO: We’re sure in the middle of it now. Come on, Han, old buddy, don't let me down...

INT BUNKER - CONTROL ROOM

Controllers watch the main viewscreen on which a vague figure of an Imperial walker pilot can be seen. There is a great deal of static and interference.

HAN/PILOT: (VO) It's over, Commander. The Rebels have been routed. They're fleeing into the woods. We need reinforcements to continue the pursuit.

The controllers cheer.

CONTROL ROOM COMMANDER: Send three squads to help. Open the back door.
SECOND COMMANDER: Yes, sir.

EXT. FOREST - GENERATOR BUNKER

As the door to the bunker opens and the Imperial troops rush out, they're surprised to find themselves surrounded by Rebels, their weapons pointed at them. Ewoks holding bows and arrows appear on the roof of the bunker. The Imperial troops throw down their guns as Han and Chewie rush inside the bunker with explosive charges.

INT. BUNKER - CONTROL ROOM

Han, Chewie, and several troops rush into the control room and plant explosive charges on the control panels and rush out.

HAN: Throw me another charge.
LEIA: The Rebel fleet must be on the ropes by now. 
HAN: Yeah. But in about sixty seconds, the real party’s gonna start. 

INT. EMPEROR'S TOWER - THRONE ROOM

Vader stalks the low-ceilinged area on the level below the throne, searching for Luke in the semi-darkness, his lightsaber held ready.

VADER: You cannot hide forever, Luke. A Jedi does not skulk in shadowy corners. 
LUKE: I will not fight you.
VADER: Give yourself to the dark side. It is the only way you can save your friends. Yes, your thoughts betray you. Your feelings for them are strong. Especially for...

Vader stops and senses something. 

VADER: Sister! 

Luke shuts his eyes tightly, in anguish.

VADER: So...you have a twin sister. Your feelings have now betrayed her, too. Obi-Wan was wise to hide her from me. Now his failure is complete. If you will not turn to the dark side… then perhaps she will!!!

Luke’s lightsaber suddenly yanks off Vader’s belt, flying into Luke’s hand. His face is twisted with primal, murderous rage. 

LUKE: NNNNNOOOOO!!!!!

Luke ignites his lightsaber and screams in anger, rushing at his father with a frenzy we have not seen before. Sparks fly as Luke and Vader fight in the cramped area. Luke's hatred forces Vader to retreat out of the low area and across a bridge overlooking a vast elevator shaft. Each stroke of Luke's sword drives his father further toward defeat.

The Dark Lord is knocked to his knees, and as he raises his sword to block another onslaught, Luke slashes Vader's right hand off at the wrist, causing metal and electronic parts to fly from the mechanical stump. Vader's sword clatters uselessly away, over the edge of the platform and into the bottomless shaft below. With a weak scream, Vader sags against the rail. Luke moves over Vader and holds the blade of his sword to the Dark Lord's throat, ready to deliver the final deathblow. The Emperor watches with uncontrollable, pleased agitation.

EMPEROR: Good! Your hate has made you powerful. Now, fulfill your destiny and take your father's place at my side!

Luke is frozen by these words. Luke slowly looks at the sparking stump of his father's mechanical hand, then to his own mechanical, black-gloved hand. He realizes just how much he is becoming like his father… and makes the decision for which he has spent a lifetime in preparation. 

With a supreme effort of will, Luke deactivates his lightsaber. He steps back and hurls the lightsaber away. He smiles grimly at the Emperor. 

LUKE: Never. I'll never turn to the dark side. You've failed, Your Highness. I am a Jedi, like my father before me.

The Emperor's glee turns to sullen rage.

EMPEROR: So be it...Jedi.

EXT. FOREST - GENERATOR BUNKER

Han and several of the fighters run out of the bunker and race across the clearing.

HAN: Move! Move! MOVE!!!

A shock wave knocks them flat as the bunker explodes. A chain reaction of explosions follows across the tree-filled fields toward the distant shield generator radar dish. Finally, the giant dish explodes in a spectacular display. 

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER - BRIDGE

CONTROLLER: SIR!! The shield around the Death Star has lost its power!!!

Ackbar, sitting in his control chair, looks at the viewscreen. The electronic field is gone; the moon and the Death Star now float in empty space. 

ACKBAR: (whisper) They did it…

Ackbar speaks into the radio.

ACKBAR: The shield is down! Commence attack on the Death Star's main reactor!!

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON -- COCKPIT

LANDO: We're on our way. Red Group, Gold Group, all fighters follow me. (laughs, to Nien) Told you they'd do it!
NIEN: Deh-te’ill dou. 

EXT. SPACE – AIR BATTLE

The Falcon, followed by several smaller Rebel fighters, heads toward the unfinished superstructure of the Death Star.

INT. EMPEROR'S TOWER - THRONE ROOM

Luke stands still, as the Emperor reaches the bottom of the stairs. 

LUKE: The Death Star is doomed. And so is your Empire. 

The Emperor raises his arms toward Luke.

EMPEROR: If you will not be turned…. you will be destroyed!!!

Blinding bolts of energy, evil lightning, shoot from the Emperor's hands at Luke. Even in his surprise, the young Jedi tries to use the Force to deflect them. At first he is half successful, but after a moment the bolts of energy are coming with such speed and power the young Jedi shrinks before them, screaming in agony, his knees buckling.

EMPEROR: Vader, get to your feet. Rise. (pause, then sharply) RISE, I say!! 

The wounded Vader struggles to his feet, and moves to stand at his master's side.

EMPEROR: Young fool. Only now, at the end, do you understand.

Luke is almost unconscious beneath the continuing assault of the Emperor's lightning. He clutches a canister to keep from falling into the bottomless shaft as the bolts tear through him. The Emperor ceases the lightning assault for a moment. 

EMPEROR: Your feeble skills are no match for the power of the dark side. You now pay the price for your lack of vision!!

He lashes into Luke again with the lightning bolts. Luke writhes on the floor in unbearable pain, reaching weakly up toward where Vader stands watching.

LUKE: Father, please!! HELP MEE-AAARRHHHH!!!

Again Vader stands, watching Luke. 

EMPEROR: He is my slave! Not your father!! 

The lightning assault again stops. 

EMPEROR: Now, young Skywalker...you will die.

A demonic, inhuman smile twists the Emperor’s features. Then the lightning flies out again. 

LUKE: AAAAAAAGGGGGHHHHH!!!!!

Although it would not have seemed possible, the outpouring of bolts from the Emperor's fingers actually increases in intensity, the sound screaming through the room. Luke's body writhes in pain, wilts, and finally crumples under the hideous barrage. He appears lifeless. Vader looks at his master, the Emperor, then back to Luke on the floor…

In a sudden gust of speed and strength, Vader grabs the Emperor from behind, fighting for control of the robed figure despite the Dark Lord's weakened body and gravely weakened arm. The Emperor struggles in his embrace, shrieking like a banshee, his bolt-shooting hands now lifted high, away from Luke. Now the electric-blue lightning arcs back to strike at Vader, enveloping him. Brief, horrible afterimages of Vader’s skeleton – what little there is of it – flashes under the black armor. He stumbles with his load as the sparks rain off his helmet and flow down over his black cape. He holds his evil master high over his head and staggers to the edge of the abyss at the central core of the throne room. 

EMPEROR: I AM YOUR MASTERRRR!!
VADER: (rasping, grievously injured) Darth Vader’s master. Not…Anakin…Skywalker’s…

With one final burst of his once awesome strength, Darth Vader hurls the Emperor into the bottomless shaft.

Wailing in terror, the Emperor spins helplessly into the void, arcing as he falls into the abyss. Finally, when the body is far down the shaft, it explodes, creating a rush of air and energy through the room. Vader's cape is whipped by the wind and he staggers, and collapses toward the bottomless hole, trying to follow the Emperor to the end. Weak as a kitten, Luke crawls to his father's side and pulls him away from the edge of the abyss to safety. Both the young Jedi and the giant warrior lay on the ground, too weak to move.

EXT. SPACE BATTLE - DEATH STAR

Rebel fighters follow the Falcon across the surface of the Death Star to the unfinished portion, skimming low over the curving surface of the completed side. 

INT. REBEL X-WING COCKPIT

REBEL PILOT: Squadron of enemy fighters coming – 

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON -- COCKPIT

LANDO: Blue Squadron, take your group and draw those fighters away! The rest of you, do not stop to engage!! We have to hit that reactor!! 

INT. REBEL X-WING COCKPIT

PILOT #2: I’m picking up interference – the Death Star’s jamming us!

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

PILOT #3: (on comlink) More fighters coming in at ten o’clock – 
LANDO: There’s the superstructure! Watch for the main reactor shaft!! 

EXT. SPACE BATTLE – DEATH STAR

The Falcon and the Rebel fighters dive into the super-structure of the giant battle station, followed by many TIE fighters. The ships weave dramatically at high speeds among protruding girders, half-built towers, maze-like channels, temporary scaffolding, and sporadic floodlights. 

INT. WEDGE’S X-WING FIGHTER -- COCKPIT

WEDGE: I see it – the power-channel system. I'm going in.

EXT. SPACE BATTLE – DEATH STAR

Wedge’s X-Wing shoots into the air, and arcs back down into a narrow shaft barely wide enough for three fighters wing-to-wing. 

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

LANDO: Here goes nothing.

EXT. SPACE BATTLE – DEATH STAR

The Falcon rises and spins, then plummets into the shaft. 

INT. DEATH STAR – REACTOR SHAFT

The shaft is pierced along its’ entire twisting length by myriad feeding shafts and tunnels, alternate forks, and dead-ends caverns. There are also an alarming number of obstacles within the shaft itself – heavy machinery, structural elements, power cables, floating stairways, barrier half-walls, and piled debris.  Wedge’s X-Wing, flanked by two other X-Wings, leads the chase through the ever-narrowing shaft, followed by the Falcon and four other Rebel fighters, plus TIE fighters who continually fire at the Rebels. Lights reflect off the pilot's faces as they race through the dark shaft.

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

LANDO: Now lock onto the strongest power source. It should be the power generator.

INT. WEDGE’S X-WING FIGHTER -- COCKPIT

WEDGE: Form up. And stay alert. We could run out of space real fast.

INT. DEATH STAR – REACTOR SHAFT

The fighters and the Falcon race through the tunnel, still pursued by the TIE fighters. One of the X-wings is hit from behind and explodes. One of the TIEs hits a piece of machinery and also explodes. 

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

LANDO: I’ve got a reading on a major shaft obstruction ahead. 

INT. WEDGE’S X-WING FIGHTER -- COCKPIT

WEDGE: Just picked it up. Will you make it? 

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

LANDO: Gonna be a tight squeeze…

INT. DEATH STAR – REACTOR SHAFT

The Falcon spins 360 degrees under a heat-wall blocking three-fourths of the shaft. The X-Wings and A-Wings follow, though two of them explode at the heat-wall. The TIEs draw closer. 

INT. WEDGE’S X-WING FIGHTER – COCKPIT

WEDGE: My scope’s gone!! Switch to visual scanning! 

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

LANDO: That’s useless at this speed! We’ll have to fly blind!!

INT. DEATH STAR – REACTOR SHAFT 

Two X-Wings smash into the walls as the shaft narrows again. A third is blown apart by the TIEs. 

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

LANDO: Split up and head back to the surface. See if you can get a few of those TIE fighters to follow you.

INT. REBEL A-WING FIGHTER -- COCKPIT

PILOT: Copy, Gold Leader.

INT. DEATH STAR – REACTOR SHAFT

The Rebel A-Wing ships peel off pursued by three of the TIE's, while Lando and Wedge continue through the main tunnel.

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER

Ackbar speaks into his comlink, a new sense of urgency in his voice. Outside the window behind him, the Death Star is visibly beginning to turn. 

ACKBAR: The Death Star is turning away from the fleet! It’s repositioning to destroy Endor!!

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

LANDO: How long before it’s in range?!?
ACKBAR: (on comlink) Point oh three!! 
LANDO: That’s not enough time!!!
NIEN: AAHHH!!!

Lando jerks the controls in desperation. 

INT. DEATH STAR – REACTOR SHAFT

The Falcon scrapes the side of an even dangerously smaller shaft opening. The pirate starship’s radar dish is ripped off its’ hull. Two other TIE fighters continue to blast away at them.

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

Lando looks like his life just flashed before his eyes. 

LANDO: That was too close.
NIEN: Mu-teh gate-oh. 

EXT. SPACE

The battle between the Rebel and Imperial fleet rages on. 

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER - BRIDGE

ACKBAR: We've got to give those fighters more time. Concentrate all fire on that Super Star Destroyer.

EXT. SPACE

The Rebel cruisers and fighters pound the giant Super Star Destroyer mercilessly. X-wings pilots head across the surface of the huge battleship, firing. Fires break out across the stern, and one of the two shield towers is obliterated by torpedoes. 

INT. VADER'S STAR DESTROYER - BRIDGE

Admiral Piett and a commander stand at the window, looking out to the battle. They look concerned.

CONTROLLER: Sir, we've lost our bridge deflector shield!!
PIETT: Intensify the forward batteries. I don't want anything to get through.

EXT. SPACE

A Rebel A-Wing takes a glancing hit and spins out of control, directly toward the Super Star Destroyer’s bridge. 

INT. VADER’S STAR DESTROYER -- BRIDGE

PIETT: Intensify forward firepower!

INT. REBEL A-WING FIGHTER – COCKPIT

The Rebel pilot screams. 

INT. VADER’S STAR DESTROYER -- BRIDGE

COMMANDER: TOO LATE!!!

The A-Wing smashes into the bridge, vaporizing it, the fighter, Admiral Piett, and everyone inside the room instantly. 

EXT. SPACE

The entire bridge tower of the Super Star Destroyer shatters. The massive ship begins dropping and listing to port. 

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER – BRIDGE

The crew of the Rebel cruiser cheers wildly as the Super Star Destroyer plummets toward the surface of the Death Star. Ackbar sits back in his chair and gives a contented sigh. 

EXT. SPACE – SURFACE OF THE DEATH STAR

Like a gigantic dagger, the Super Star Destroyer plows head-on into the side of the Death Star, burying its’ prow in the station’s surface. The Destroyer is vaporized; the impact is enough to actually jolt the entire station itself. 

INT. DEATH STAR - MAIN DOCKING BAY

Chaos. For the first time, the Death Star is rocked by explosions as the Rebel fleet, no longer backed against a wall, zooms over, unloading a heavy barrage. Imperial troops run in all directions, confused and desperate to escape.

In the midst of this uproar, Luke is trying to carry the enormous deadweight of his father's weakening body toward an Imperial shuttle. Finally, Luke collapses from the strain. Slowly, he rises again, hoists his father’s body over his shoulder, and stumbles toward one of the remaining shuttles. 

They finally reach the shuttle’s ramp. Luke rests his father on the ramp, trying to collect strength one last time. The explosions grow louder as Vader draws him closer.

VADER: (a whisper) Luke… help me take… this mask off…
LUKE: But you'll die.
VADER: Nothing… can stop that now. Just for once... let me look on you… with my own eyes.

Slowly, hesitantly, Luke removes the mask from his father's face. First, the helmet; then, the top portion of the mask itself. 

There, beneath the scars, is the sad and benign face of an elderly man. Bald, beardless, with a mighty scarred-over tear running from the top of his head to the back of his scalp, and the pasty-white skin of one who has not seen sunlight in decades. His dark eyes do not focus. But the dying man smiles at the sight before him.

Tears openly run down Luke’s face. The old man gives a tiny, self-deprecatory smile. 

ANAKIN: (very weak) Luminous beings…are we, Luke. Not…this crude matter. 

Luke shakes his head, but can’t find the words to speak. 

ANAKIN: Now...go, my son. Leave me…
LUKE: No. You're coming with me. I can't leave you here. I've got to save you.
ANAKIN: You… already… have, Luke. You were right about me. Tell your sister...you were right.
LUKE: Father... I won't leave you.
ANAKIN: I am…proud…that you’ve grown…into the man…I once…wanted to be…

With that, the old man closes his eyes and sinks back onto the ramp. Darth Vader, Anakin Skywalker...Luke's father, dies.

A huge explosion rocks the docking bay. Slowly, Luke rises and, half carrying, half dragging the body of his father, stumbles into the shuttle.

INT. DEATH STAR – REACTOR SHAFT

The Millennium Falcon leads a swerving bomb run through the immense superstructure of the half-built Death Star. The Rebel Star Cruisers outside continually bombard the huge station. And each direct hit is answered by resonating, chain-reaction explosions within the station itself.

INT. DEATH STAR – CONTROL STATION

Grand Moff Jerjerrod sits, brooding, in the control room of the Death Star. He seems to see nothing, and hear even less. An aide runs up to him. 

AIDE: The Rebel fleet is closing in, sir!!
JERJERROD: (a dazed whisper) Concentrate all fire on that sector. 

Behind him, a console bursts into flame. 

AIDE: The fighters in the superstructure are eluding our defense system, Commander! Shouldn’t we – 
JERJERROD: Flood sectors 304 and 138. That should slow them up. 

The aide glares curiously at his commander, wondering if Jerjerrod’s hearing him at all. 

AIDE: Sir? 
JERJERROD: What is the rotation factor to firing range on the Endor moon? 

The aide checks a screen. 

AIDE: Point oh two to moon target, sir. Commander, the fleet -- 
JERJERROD: Accelerate rotation until moon is in range. Then fire on my mark. 

The aide pulls a bank of switches. 

AIDE: Yes, sir. Rotation accelerating…Point oh one to moon target, sir. Sir…goodbye, sir. 

The aide salutes, puts the firing switch in Jerjerrod’s hands, then runs out the door as another explosion shakes the room. Jerjerrod smiles calmly at the viewscreen, which shows Endor starting to come into view. 

INT. MILLENNIUM FALCON - COCKPIT AND GUN PORTS

Lando's crew fires away at the pursuing TIE fighters as the dashing Baron of Bespin and his alien copilot home in on the main reactor shaft. A lone X-wing is just in front of the Falcon.

INT. WEDGE’S X-WING FIGHTER -- COCKPIT

WEDGE: There it is!

INT. DEATH STAR – REACTOR CHAMBER

At last, the monstrous reactor itself comes into view, as the Falcon and X-Wing race into the massive chamber. It is awesome, as the reactor looms in the center of the chamber. 

INT. WEDGE’S X-WING FIGHTER -- COCKPIT

WEDGE: It’s too big! My proton torpedoes won’t even dent that!!

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON -- COCKPIT

LANDO: All right, Wedge. Go for the power regulator on the north tower. I’m carrying concussion missiles – they should penetrate. Once I let ‘em go, we won’t have much time to get out of here. 

INT. WEDGE’S X-WING FIGHTER -- COCKPIT

WEDGE: Copy, Gold Leader. I'm already on my way out.

INT. DEATH STAR – REACTOR CHAMBER

The X-wing heads for the top of the huge reactor and fires several proton torpedoes at the power regulator, causing a series of small explosions.

The Falcon heads for the main reactor, and when it is dangerously close, Lando fires the missiles, which shoot out of the Falcon with a powerful roar, and hit directly at the center of the main reactor.

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON -- COCKPIT

For a second, the flash is bright to see anything. Lando winces at the dangerously close explosion. 

INT. DEATH STAR – REACTOR CHAMBER 

The reactor begins to collapse on itself, unleashing a tsunami of fire at the Rebel ships. Lando maneuvers the Falcon out of the winding superstructure just ahead of the continuing chain of explosions.

INT. REBEL STAR CRUISER - BRIDGE

Ackbar and other Mon Calamari lean on the railing of the bridge, watching the large screen showing the Death Star in the main briefing room.

ACKBAR: Move the fleet away from the Death Star!!

INT. DEATH STAR – CONTROL ROOM 

Jerjerrod watches the viewscreen, as Endor crawls into the crosshairs. Screams erupt in the next room. 

JERJERROD: (whisper to himself) Thirty seconds…

EXT. DEATH STAR – DOCKING BAY

An Imperial shuttle, with Luke alone in the cockpit, rockets out of the main docking bay as that entire section of the Death Star is blown away. 

INT. IMPERIAL SHUTTLE

Luke pilots toward the safety of the Sanctuary moon.

INT. DEATH STAR – REACTOR SHAFT

The Falcon flies at top speed, with a single X-wing as escort, over the endless surface of the Death Star. A series of explosions within the superstructure follow, beginning to overtake the small craft as it races for an exit. The two surviving TIEs behind them are vaporized in the wave of fire. 

INT. MILLENNIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

Lando braces himself for the worst as the fire begins to overtake the Falcon. The end of the shaft is visible in the far distance. 

EXT. DEATH STAR

An X-wing, piloted by Wedge Antilles, races out of the exploding superstructure and whizzes toward the Sanctuary Moon. 

INT. WEDGE’S X-WING FIGHTER – COCKPIT

Wedge is relieved to escape the Death Star. 

INT. DEATH STAR – REACTOR SHAFT

The Falcon seems to be almost riding on the fire, as it licks across the pirate starship’s hull. It looks as if the Falcon will not make it…

EXT. DEATH STAR

Suddenly, miraculously, the pirate starship blasts out of the exploding space station as though it were spit out by the fire itself. 

INT. MILLENIUM FALCON – COCKPIT

LANDO: YYYEEEEHHAHHH!!!!
NIEN: HAHAHAHAHAH!!!!

EXT. SPACE 

As the Millenium Falcon triumphantly flies past camera, the Death Star flashes once and supernovas into oblivion. 

EXT. ENDOR FOREST

Han is binding Leia’s arm. But he and Leia, Chewie, the droids, the Rebel troops, and the Ewoks all look to the sky as the Death Star reveals itself in a final flash of self-destruction. They all cheer wildly. 

THREEPIO: They did it!

Han looks down from the sky to Leia, a look of concern on his face. His thoughts turn to Leia, as she continues to look at the sky, as though listening for a silent voice. He misinterprets it as fear for Luke. 

HAN: I’m sure Luke wasn’t on that thing when it blew…
LEIA: He wasn’t. I can feel it. 

She seems quietly astonished at herself, at her newfound abilities. Han smiles, again misinterpreting it. 

HAN: You love him, don’t you. 

Leia smiles, puzzled. 

LEIA: Yes. 
HAN: All right. Fine. I understand. When he comes back…I won’t get in the way. 

Leia finally realizes his misunderstanding, and almost laughs. 

LEIA: Oh. No…it’s not like that at all. (gently) He’s my brother. 

Han’s eyes go wide. He starts to say “What?!?”, but Leia cuts off the exclamation with a deep, slow, loving kiss. Han slowly gets a goofy grin on his face, and a realization that everything from now on will be all right. He kisses her again, almost crying with love. Wicket walks over to them, chattering in his language. Han and Leia both laugh. 

WIPE TO: 

EXT. ENDOR FOREST - NIGHT

Luke sets a torch to the logs stacked under a funeral pyre where his father's body lies, again dressed in black mask and helmet. He stands, watching sadly, as the flames leap higher to consume Darth Vader -- Anakin Skywalker. In the distance, See Threepio watches as well. 

In the sky above, fireworks explode and Rebel fighters zoom above the forest.

EXT. CLOUD CITY – BESPIN – SUNSET

Fireworks explode above the city as people party wildly and searchlights pan the sky. A twin-pod cloud zooms in above the festivities. 

EXT. MOS EISELY -- TATOOINE – DAY

A skyhopper weaves around buildings as confetti falls all over the city of Mos Eisely, awash in celebration. 

EXT. PLAZA – CORUSCANT – NIGHT

Confetti falls on the city of Coruscant, as hundreds of thousands of citizens celebrate. An airspeeder flies overhead. In the crowd, a stormtrooper is being lifted overhead and carried over the cheering throng. A giant statue of the Emperor, gripping a large orb, is toppled and crashes to the ground to a loud roar of applause. Fireworks explode in the full-moon sky. 

EXT. EWOK VILLAGE SQUARE - NIGHT

A huge bonfire is the centerpiece of a wild celebration. Rebels and Ewoks rejoice in the warm glow of firelight, drums beating, singing, dancing, and laughing in the communal language of victory and liberation. Even Artoo and Teebo have reconciled and are dancing side-by-side. 

Lando runs in and is enthusiastically hugged by Han and Chewie. Wedge joins them, shaking hands with the group. 

Then, finally, Luke arrives and the friends rush to greet and embrace him. They stand close, this hardy group, taking comfort in each other's touch, together to the end.

Rebels and Ewoks join together in dancing and celebration. The original group of adventurers watch from the sidelines. Only Luke seems distracted, alone in their midst, his thoughts elsewhere.

He looks off to the side and sees shimmering, smiling figures at the edge of the shadows: Ben Kenobi, Yoda… and, appearing before his eyes in Jedi robes, Anakin Skywalker. He looks at his son with an expression of love and eternal gratitude. Luke smiles back, content that all has finally turned out for the best. Leia comes up to him and leads him back into the circle of friends. The heroes gather together, united in the spirit of victory… and of love. 


IRIS OUT

END CREDITS OVER STAR FIELD

THE END



                             Directed by
                     RICHARD MARQUAND

                             Produced by
                     HOWARD KAZANJIAN

                            Screenplay by
        LAWRENCE KASDAN and GEORGE LUCAS

                               Story by
                         GEORGE LUCAS

                      Executive Producer
                         GEORGE LUCAS

                             Co-Producers
                   ROBERT WATTS, JIM BLOOM

                         Production Designer
                        NORMAN REYNOLDS

                       Director of Photography
                          ALAN HUME, B.S.C

                              Edited by
      SEAN BARTON, MARCIA LUCAS, DUWAYNE DUNHAM

                            Visual Effects
   RICHARD EDLUND, A.S.C, DENNIS MUREN, KEN RALSTON

                          Costume Designers
     AGGIE GUERARD RODGERS, NILO RODIS-JAMERO

                    Mechanical Effects Supervision
                              KIT WEST

                     Make-Up and Creature Design
                  PHIL TIPPETT, STUART FREEBORN

                             Sound Design
                              BEN BURTT

                               Music by
                          JOHN WILLIAMS

                                 CAST

Luke Skywalker                                               MARK HAMILL
Han Solo                                                          HARRISON FORD
Princess Leia                                                   CARRIE FISHER
Lando Calrissian                                             BILLY DEE WILLIAMS
See-Threepio (C-3PO)                                       ANTHONY DANIELS
Chewbacca                                                       PETER MAYHEW
Anakin Skywalker                                            SEBASTIAN SHAW
Emperor                                                            IAN McDIARMID
Yoda                                                                  FRANK OZ
Darth Vader                                                      DAVID PROWSE
Voice of Darth Vader                                       JAMES EARL JONES
Ben (Obi-Wan) Kenobi                                     ALEC GUINNESS

                           SUPPORTING CAST

Artoo-Detoo (R2-D2)                                        KENNY BAKER
Moff Jerjerrod                                                  MICHAEL PENNINGTON
Admiral Piett                                                    KENNETH COLLEY
Bib Fortuna                                                      MICHAEL CARTER
Wedge Antilles                                                 DENIS LAWSON
Admiral Ackbar                                                TIM ROSE
General Crix Madine                                        DERMOT CROWLEY
Mon Mothma                                                    CAROLINE BLAKISTON
Wicket                                                               WARWICK DAVIS
Paploo                                                              KENNY BAKER
Boba Fett                                                         JEREMY BULLOCH
Oola                                                                   FEMI TAYLOR
Sy Snootles                                                      ANNIE ARBOGAST
Fat Dancer                                                       CLAIRE DAVENPORT
Teebo                                                               JACK PURVIS
Logray                                                             MIKE EDMONDS
Chief Chirpa                                                    JANE BUSBY
Ewok Warrior                                                   MALCOM DIXON
Ewok Warrior                                                   MIKE COTTRELL
Nicki                                                                  NICKI READE
Star Destroyer Controller No. 1                       ADAM BAREHAM
Star Destroyer Controller No. 2                       JONATHAN OLIVER
Star Destroyer Captain No. 1                          PIP MILLER
Star Destroyer Captain No. 2                          TOM MANNION
Jabba Puppeteers                                   TOBY PHILPOTT, MIKE EDMONDS,
                                                                  DAVID BARCLAY
Puppeteers                                               MICHAEL McCORMICK, DEEP ROY,
                                                 SIMON WILLIAMSON, HUGH SPIRIT,
                                      SWIM LEE, MICHAEL QUINN, RICHARD ROBINSON

                            Set Decorators
                   MICHAEL FORD, HARRY LANGE
                          Conceptual Artist
                           RALPH McQUARRIE
                            Art Directors
                       FRED HOLE, JAMES SCHOPPE
                       Assistant Art Directors
             MICHAEL LAMONT, JOHN FENNER, RICHARD DAWKING
                       Assistant Art Decorator
                          SHARON CARTWRIGHT
                             Set Dresser
                            DOUG VON KOSS
                        Assistant Set Dresser
                              CHUCK RAY
                         Construction Manager
                              BILL WELCH
                    Assistant Construction Manager
                              ALAN BOOTH
                       Construction Supervisor
                             ROGER IRVIN
                           General Foreman
                              BILL IIAMS
                         Construction Foreman
         GREG CALLAS, GUY CLAUSE, DOUG ELLIOT, STAN WAKASHIGE
                           Laborer Foremen
                      GENE FUKUZAWA, DON JOHNSON
                            Paint Foreman
                              GARY CLARK
                           Standby Painter
                           GIOVANNI FERRARA
                            Sketch Artist
                              ROY CARNON
                            Scenic Artist
                             TED MICHELL
                       Assistant Scenic Artist
                          STEVEN SALLYBANKS
                      Decor and Lettering Artist
                       BOB WALKER, BRIAN SMITH
                    Electronic Graphic Consultant
                            ROB DICKINSON
                            Set Draftsmen
               REG BREAM, MARK BILLERMAN, CHRIS CAMPELL
            GEORGE DJURKOVIC, GAVIN BOCQUET, KEVIN PHIPPS
                          Production Buyers
                      DAVID LUSBY, IAN GILADJIAN
                         Construction Storeman
                           DAVID MIDDLETON
                       Art Department Secretary
                             CAROL REGAN

                   Location Director of Photography
                             JIM GLENNON
                        Additional Photography
                              JACK LOWIN
                         Operating Cameramen
               ALEC MILLS, TOM LAUGHRIDGE, MIKE BENSON
                             Focus Puller
                     MICHAEL FRIFT, CHRIS TANNER
                         Assistant Cameramen
                     Leo NAPOLITANO, BOB LA BONGE
                      Second Assistant Cameramen
        SIMON HUME, STEVE TATE, MARTIN KENZIE, MICHAEL GLENNON
                               Gaffers
                      MIKE PANTAGES, BOB BREMNER
                          Aerial Photography
                     RON GOODMAN, MARGARET HERRON
                           Helicopter Pilot
                              MARK WOLFE
                               Key Grip
                            DICK DOVA SPAH
                               Best Boy
                             JOE CROWLEY
                              Dolly Grip
                        CHUNKY HUSE, REG HALL
                     Matte Photography Consultant
                        STANLEY SAYER, B.S.C.
                           Rigging Gaffers
                      CLARK GARLAND, TOMMY BROWN
                             Electrician
                            Bill DREYFUSS
                            Craft Service
                           GEORGE MAURICIO

                         Chief Make-Up Artist
                      TOM SMITH, GRAHAM FREEBORN
                           Make-Up Artists
                    PETER ROBB KING, DICKIE MILLS
               KAY FREEBORN, NICK DUDMAN, ALAN BROWNIE
                          Make-Up Assistants
         BOB KEEN, SUE OAKS, CHRISTINE ALLSOPP, DANIEL PARKER
                    JEREMY HARRIS, TERRI ANDERSON
                       Make-Up Effects Engineer
                             BOB BROMLEY
                              Modellers
    MICHAEL OSBORN, JAN STEVENS, CHRISTINE OVERS, RICHARD PADBURY
                          Chief Hairdresser
                          PATRICIA McDERMONT
                             Hairdressers
                      MIKE LOCKEY, PAUL LE BLANC
                     Chief Articulation Engineer
                             STUART ZIFF
                   Assistant Articulation Engineer
                           EBEN STROMQUIST
                           Armature Design
                            PETER RONZANI
                           Plastic Designer
                            RICHARD DAVIS
                         Sculptural Designers
                      CHUCK WILEY, JAMES HOWARD
                            Key Sculptors
                DAVE CARSON, TONY McVEY, DAVE SOSALLA,
                      JUDY ELKINS, DEREK HOWARTH
                           Cheif Moldmaker
                             WESLEY SEEDS
                              Moldmaker
                              RON YOUNG
                         Creature Technicians
         RANDY DUTRA, KIRK THATCHER, DAN HOWARD, JAMES ISAAC,
            BRIAN TURNER, JEANNE LAUREN, RICHARD SPAH JR.,
                 ETHAN WILEY, RAY HANSON, RODGER SHAW
                         Creature Consultants
                        JON BERG, CHRIS WALAS
                   Production/Creature Co-Ordinator
                              PATTY BLAU
                      Latex Foam Lab Supervisor
                            TOM McLAUGHLIN
                        Animatronics Engineers
                            JOHN COPPINGER

                         Wardrobe Supervisor
                               RON BECK
                          Costume Supervisor
                         MARY ELIZABETH STILL
                          Wardrobe Mistress
                            JANET TEBROOKE
                             Shop Manager
                             JENNY GREEN
                               Jeweler
                            RICHARD MILLER
                         Wardrobe Assistants
      PATRICK   WHEATLEY, COLIN WILCON, JANET LUCAS, DIANE MURPHY,
            MICHAEL JEFFREY, KEITH MORTON, JOHN BIRKINSHAW
                          Creature Costumers
  BARBARA KASSAL, EDWIN PELLIKKA, ANNE POLLAND, ELVIRA ANGELINETTA,
       MICK BECKER, CLAUDIA EVERETT, LAURIE RUDD, NANCY SERVIN,
   KARRIN KAIN, DERIK HYDE, MAGGIE JOY, PATTE MOON, JANICE GARTIN,
   JULIE WOODBRIDGE, BARBARA GILLETT, RITA WAKELY, EILEEN SULLIVAN

                           Property Master
                            PETER HANCOCK
                      Assistant Property Master
                           CHARLES TORBETT
                         Property Supervisors
                    DAN COANGELO, BRIAN LOFTHOUSE
                               Property
                     HOLLY WALKER, IVAN VAN PERRE
                              Propmakers
                   BILL HARGREAVES, RICHARD PETERS
                           Master Carpenter
                              BERT LONG
                           Master Plasterer
                             KENNY CLARKE
                            Master Painter
                           ERIC SHIRTCLIFFE
                          Supervising Rigger
                             RED LAWRENCE
                        Supervising Stagehand
                             EDDIE BURKE
                          Sail Co-Ordinators
                   BILL KREYSLER, WARWICK TOMPKINS
                          Sails Engineering
                    DERRICK BAYLIS, PEGGY KASHUBA

                           Production Sound
                        TONY DAWE, RANDY THOM
                            Boom Operators
                    DAVID BATCHELOR, DAVID PARKER
                           Sound Assistants
                        SHEP DAWE, JIM MANSON
                           Audio Engineers
      T.M. CHRISTOPHER, KRIS HANDWERK, TOM JOHNSON, BRIAN KELLY,
       ROBERT MARTY, SCOTT ROBINSON, DENNIE THORPE, JOHN WATSON
                      Post-Production Assistants
    CATHERINE COOMBS, K.C. HODENFIELD, JAMES KESSLER, SUSAN LEAHY
                            English Lyrics
                           JOSEPH WILLIAMS
                           Huttese Lyrics
                            ANNIE ARBOGAST
                            Ewokese Lyrics
                              BEN BURTT
                         Re-Recording Mixers
           GARY SUMMER, ROGER SAVAGE, BEN BURTT, RANDY THOM
                           Music Recording
                            ERIC TOMLINSON
                            Orchestrations
                          HERBERT W. SPENCER
                       Supervising Music Editor
                           KENNETH WANNBERG
                        Re-Recording Engineer
                           TOMLINSON HOLMAN
                        Assistant Film Editors
       STEVE STARKEY, CONRAD BUFF, PHIL SANDERSON, NICK HOSKER,
                    DEBRA McDERMOTT, CLIVE HARTLEY
                        Sound Effects Editors
              RICHARD BURROW, TERESA ECKTON, KEN FISHER
                           Dialogue Editors
           LAUREL LADEVICH, CURT SCHULKEY, BONNIE KOEHLER,
                         VICKIE ROSE SAMPSON
                       Assistant Sound Editors
   CHRIS WEIR, BILL MANN, GLORIA BORDERS, SUZANNE FOX, KATHY RYAN,
                   NANCY JENKS, MARY HELEN LEASMAN

                        Production Supervisor
                            DOUGLAS TWIDDY
                         Production Executive
                         ROBERT LATHAM BROWN
                       Unit Production Manager
                             MIKI HERMAN
                     Assistant Production Manager
                             PATRICA CARR
                        Associate to Producer
                          LOUIS G. FRIEDMAN

            First Assistant Director/Second Unit Director
                            DAVID TOMBLIN
                      Second Assistant Directors
       ROY BUTTON, MICHEAL STEELE, CHRIS NEWMAN, RUSSELL LODGE
                         Production Assistant
                              IAN BRYCE
                       Production Co-Ordinator
                              LATA RYAN
                       Co-Ordination Assistants
                     SUNNI KERWIN, GAIL SAMUELSON
                          Script Supervisor
                         PAMELA MANN FRANCIS
                      Location Script Supervisor
                              BOB FOREST
                          Stunt Co-Ordinator
                            GLENN RANDALL
                            Stunt Arranger
                            PETER DIAMOND
                               Casting
                         MARY SELWAY BUCKLEY
                           Location Casting
                        DAVE EMAN, BILL LYTLE
                     Assistants to Mr. Kazanjian
                  KATHLEEN HARTNEY ROSS, BETTY SHARP
                        Assistant to Mr. Bloom
                            JOHN SYRJAMAKI
                        Assistant to Mr. Lucas
                               JANE BAY
                      Assistant to Mr. Marquand
                          LEILA KIRKPATRICK
                            Choreographer
                           GILLIAN GREGORY
                        Location Choreographer
                             WENDY ROGERS

                        Production Controller
                            ARTHUR CARROLL
                        Production Accountant
                          MARGARET MITCHELL
                        Production Accountant
                             COLIN HURREN
                        Assistant Accountants
     SHEALA DANIELL, BARBARA HARLEY, SIAN WILLIAMS, ALEX MATCHAM
                         Location Accountants
        DIANE DANKWARDT, PINKI RAGAN, DICK WRIGHT, SUSAN ROYAL

                     Transportation Co-Ordinator
                            GENE SCHWARTZ
                       Transportation Captains
                    JOHN FEINBLATT, H. LEE NOBLITT
                    Studio Transportation Managers
                       VIC MINAY, MARK LA BONGE
                           Location Contact
                             LENNIE FIKE
                         Still Photographers
                   ALBERT CLARKE, RALPH NELSON JR.
                            Unit Publicist
                            GORDON ARNELL
                         Assistant Publicist
                              JUNE BROOM
                              Marketing
                     SIDNEY GANIS, SUSAN TREMBLY
                      Photographic Co-Ordinators
                      BARB LAKIN, KATHY WIPPERT
                               Research
                             DEBORAH FINE

                      Special Effects Supervisor
                             ROY ARBOGAST
                        Special Effect Foreman
                          WILLIAM DAVID LEE
                   Special Effects Floor Controller
                             IAN WINGROVE
                      Senior Effects Technicians
               PETER DAWSON, RODNEY FULLER, NEIL SWAN,
                    TREVOR NEIGHBOUR, DAVID WATSON
                     Chief Electronics Technician
                               RON HONE
                     Special Effects Technicians
         KEN GITTENS, BARRY WHITROD, JOHN HATT, TERRY GLASS,
        YVES DE BONO, STEVE LLOYD, ROGER NICHOLS, PAUL KNOWLES
                           Wire Specialists
                      BOB HARMAN, STEVE CRAWLEY
                       Location Special Effects
    KEVIN PIKE, MIKE WOOD, DAVID SIMMONS, GARY ZINK, EDDIE SURKIN,
           JOHN STIRBER, BRUNO VAN ZEEBROECK, JOHN CHAPOT,
                  WILLIAM KLINGER JR. DONALD CHADLER
                         Electrical Engineer
                              TERRY COX
                         Effects Co-Ordinator
                              JOHN BAKER
                          Effects Secretary
                             REBECCA WEST

                  MINIATURE AND OPTICAL EFFECTS UNIT
                      INDUSTRIAL LIGHT AND MAGIC

                    Optical Photography Supervisor
                           BRUCE NICHOLSON
                          Effects Cameramen
       DON DOW, MICHAEL J. McALISTER, BILL NEIL, SCOTT FARRAR,
     SELWYN EDDY III, MICHAEL OWENS, ROBERT ELSWIT, RICK FICHTER,
            STEWART BARBEE, MARK GREDELL, DAVID HARDBURGER
                         Assistant Cameramen
  PAT SWEENEY, KIM MARKS, ROBERT HILL, RAY GILBERTI, RANDY JOHNSON,
     PATRICK McARDLE, PETER DAULTON, BESSIE WILEY, MARYAN EVANS,
               TOBY HEIDEL, DAVID FINCHER, PETER ROMANO
                      Optical Printer Operators
         JOHN ELIS, DAVID BERRY, KENNETH SMITH, DONALD CLARK,
                        MARK VARGO, JAMES LIM
                           Optical Line-Up
      TOM ROSSETER, ED L. JONES, RALPH GORDON, PHILIP BARBERIO,
               PEG HUNTER, MARY WALTER, MICHAEL SHANNON
                           Lab Technicians
             TIM GEIDEMAN, DUNCAN MYERS, MICHAEL S. MOORE

                     Art Directors-Visual Effects
                             JOE JOHNSTON
                        Production Illustrator
                            GEORGE JENSON
                         Stop Motion Animator
                            TOM ST. AMAND
                      Matte Painting Supervisor
                          MICHAEL PANGRAZIO
                        Matte Painting Artists
                       CHRIS EVANS, FRANK ORDAZ
                          Matte Photography
                      NEIL KREPELA, CRAIG BARRON
                          Chief Model Makers
   PAUL HUSTON, CHARLES BAILEY, MICHAEL GLENN FULMER, EASE OWYEUNG
                             Model Makers
      WILLIAM MARSHALL, SEAN CASEY, LARRY TAN, BARBARA GALLUCCI,
  JEFF MANN, IRA KEELER, BILL BECK, MIKE COCHRANE, BARBARA AFFONSO,
   BILL BUTTERFIELD, MARCHI McMAHON, RANDY OTTENBERG, ROBERT BOVILL
                        Modelshop Supervisors
                     LORNE PETERSON, STEVE GAWLEY
                         Animation Supervisor
                             JAMES KEEFER
                        Head Effects Animators
                   GARRY WALLER, KIMBERLY KNOWLTON
                          Effects Animators
 TERRY WINDELL, RENEE HOLT, MIKE LESSA, SAMUEL COMSTOCK, ROB LA DUCA,
     ANNICK THERRIEN, SUKI STERN, MARGOT PIPKIN, JOHN ARMSTRONG,
          REBECCA PETRULLI, DARRYL STUDBAKER, PHILIP NORWOOD

                  Supervising Visual Effects Editor
                            ARTHUR REPOLA
                        Visual Effects Editors
             HOWARD STEIN, PETER AMUNDSON, BILL KIMBERLIN
                   Assistant Visual Effects Editors
   ROBERT CHRISOULIS, MICHAEL GLEASON, JAY IGNASZEWSKI, JOE CLASS,
                      TERRY PECK, DANIEL CANDIB


                         General Manager, ILM
                              TOM SMITH
                        Production Supervisor
                        PATRICIA ROSE DUIGNAN
                       Production Co-Ordinators
                   WARREN FRANKLIN, LAURIE VERMONT
                         Administrative Staff
       CHRISSE ENGLAND, LAURA KAYSEN, PAULA KARSH, KAREN AYERS,
    SONJA PAULSON, KAREN DUBE, ED BREED, LES THALER, MIKE COOPER,
                         NED GORMAN, RON FODE
                        Production Assistants
         SUSAN FRITZ-MONAHAN, KATHY SHINE, GEOFFREY DeVALOIS
                     Supervisor-Still Photography
                            TERRY CHOSTNER
                         Still Photographers
                   ROBERTO McGRATH, KERRY MORDQUIST
                     Electronic System Designers
                      JERRY JEFFRESS, KRIS BROWN
                         Electronic Engineers
                    MIKE MacKENZIE, MARTY BRENNEIS
                          Computer Graphics
                       WILLIAM REEVES, TOM DUFF
                   Equipment Engineering Supervisor
                            GENE WHITEMAN
                              Machinists
                     UDO PAMPEL, CONRAD BONDERSON
                        Apprentice Machinists
                       DAVID HANKS, CHRIS RAND
                           Design Engineer
                             MIKE BOLLES
                       Equipment Support Staff
    WADE CHILDRESS, MICHAEL J. SMITH, CRISTI McCARTHY, ED TENNLER
                     Supervising Stage Technician
                             TED MOEHNKE
                            Stage Foreman
                         PATRICK FITZSIMMONS
                          Stage Technicians
  BOB FINLEY III, ED HIRSH, JOHN McLEOD, PETER STOLZ, DAVE CHILDERS,
          HAROLD COLE, MERLIN OHM, JOE FULMER, LANCE BRAKETT
                           Pyrotechnicians
                       THAINE MORRIS, DAVE PIER
                     Steadicam Plate Photography
                             GARRET BROWN
                     Ultra High Speed Photography
                        BRUCE HILL PRODUCTIONS
                             Color Timers
                      JIM SCHURMANN, BOB HAGANS
                           Negative Cutter
                          SUNRISE FILM INC.
                      Additional Optical Effects
       LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN FILMS, PACIFIC TITLE, MONACO FILM LABS,
      CALIFORNIA FILM, VISUAL CONCEPTS ENGINEERING, MOVIE MAGIC,
                      VAN der VEER PHOTO EFFECTS

                                EWOKS

MARGO APOSTOCOS                                 LINDA BOWLEY
RAY ARMSTRONG                                   PETER BURROUGHS
EILEEN BAKER                                    DEBBIE CARRINGTON
MICHAEL H. BALHAM                               MAUREEN CHARLTON
BOBBIE BELL                                     WILLIAM COPPEN
PATTY BELL                                      SADIE CORRIE
ALAN BENNETT                                    TONY COX
SARAH BENNETT                                   JOHN CUMMING
PAMELA BETTS                                    JEAN D'AGOSTINO
DAN BLACKNER                                    LUIS DE JESUS
DEBBIE DIXON                                    JOHN LUMMISS
MARGARITA FERNANDEZ                             NANCY MACLEAN
PHIL FONDACARO                                  PETER MANDELL
SAL FONDACARO                                   CAROLE MORRIS
TONY FRIEL                                      STACY NICHOLS
DAN FRISHMAN                                    CHRIS NUNN
JOHN GAVAM                                      BARBARA O'LAUGHLIN
MICHAEL GILDEN                                  BRIAN ORENSTIEN
PAUL GRANT                                      HARRELL PARKER JR.
LARS GREEN                                      JOHN PEDRICK
LYDIA GREEN                                     APRIL PERKINS
PAM GRIZZ                                       RONNIE PHILLIPS
ANDREW HERD                                     KATIE PERVIS
J. J. JACKSON                                   CAROL READ
GLYNN JONES                                     NICHOLAS READ
RICHARD JONES                                   DIANA REYNOLDS
TREVOR JONES                                    DANIEL RODGERS
KAREN LAY                                       CHRIS ROMANO
DEAN SHACKENFORD                                JOSEPHINE STADDON
KIRAN SHAH                                      KEVIN THOMPSON
FELIX SILLA                                     KENDRA WALL
LINDA SPRIGGS                                   BRIAN WHEELER
GERARLD STADDON                                 BUTCH WILHELM

                             Mime Artists
 FRANK ANDERSON, AILSA BERK, SEAN CRAWFORD, ANDY CUNNINGHAM, TIM DRY,
      GRAEME HATTRICK, PHIL HERBERT, GERALD HOME, PAUL SPRINGER

                           Stunt Performers
BOB ANDERSON, DIRK YOHAN BEER, MORC BOYLE, MIKE CASSIDY, TRACY EDDON,
 SANDRA GROSS, TED GROSSMAN, FRANK HENSON, LARRY HOLT, BILL HORRIGAN,
      ALF JOINT, JULIUS LEFLORE, COLIN SKEAPING, MALCOM WEAVER,
                PAUL WESTON, BOB YERKES, DAN ZORMEIER

 Thanks to the U.S. Department of Interior Bureau of Land Management
                      and National Park Service
         Photographed in Buttercup Valley, Death Valley, and
                     Smith River, California and
              EMI-Elstree Studios, Borehamwood, England
            Cameras and Lenses by Joe Dunton Cameras Ltd.
       Aerial Camera System by Wesscam Camera Systems (Europe)
          Lighting Equipment and Crew from Lee Electric Ltd.
       Production Vehicles Courtesy of GMC Truck and Oldsmobile
     Location Service by Cinemobile  Air Transportation by PAN AM
Re-Recording at Sprocket Systems  Music Recording at Anvil-Abbey Road Studio
    Special Visual Effects Produced at Industrial Light and Magic,
                       Marin County, California
          Color by Rank Film Laboratories  Prints by Deluxe

                       Recorded in DOLBY STEREO

     A Lucasfilm Ltd. Production  A Twentieth Century-Fox Release

           Music Performed by the London Symphony Orchestra

             Original Soundtrack on RSO Records and Tapes
                  Novelization from Ballantine Books
          TM & Lucasfilm Ltd (LFL) 1983 All Rights Reserved
MPAA CODE NO. 26991 MPAA RATING: PG  Running Time: 2 hours 13 minutes



